Untangling the Web
Applications of the Internet and
Other Information Technologies
to Higher Learning

David J. McArthur
Matthew W. Lewis

RAND Education

R

The research described in this report was supported by RAND
Education with funding from the California Education Round Table.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
McArthur, David, 1951– .
Untangling the web : applications of the Internet and other information
technologies to higher education / David McArthur, Matthew Lewis.
p.
cm.
“Prepared for the California Education Round Table by RAND Education.”
“MR-975-EDU.”
Includes bibliographical references (p. ).
ISBN 0-8330-2617-8 (alk. paper)
1. Education, Higher—Computer network resources.
2. Internet (Computer network) in education. 3. World Wide
Web (Information retrieval system). I. Lewis, Matthew, 1956– .
II. California Education Roundtable. III. RAND Education (Institute).
IV. Title.
LB1044.87.M32 1998
025.06 ‘ 37—dc21
98-3968
CIP

Building on more than 25 years of research and evaluation work,
RAND Education (formerly RAND’s Institute on Education and
Training) has as its mission the improvement of educational policy
and practice in formal and informal settings from early childhood
on. RAND is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and
decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND’s publications
do not necessarily reflect the opinions or policies of its research
sponsors.
© Copyright 1998 RAND

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any
form by any electronic or mechanical means (including
photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval)
without permission in writing from RAND.
Published 1998 by RAND
1700 Main Street, P
.O. Box 2138, Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
1333 H St., N.W., Washington, D.C. 20005-4707
RAND URL: http://www.rand.org/
To order RAND documents or to obtain additional information,
contact Distribution Services: Telephone: (310) 451-7002;
Fax: (310) 451-6915; Internet: order@rand.org

PREFACE

In just a couple of years, the Internet and World Wide Web have
transformed communication, scholarship, and business. But what
potential do they hold for changing higher education—the place
where this technology, once called the ARPANET, originated over
twenty years ago? Will they help universities reduce costs in the face
of often-dramatic budget reductions? Will distance learning
(dissemination of educational material and information through
electronic and hardcopy media, rather than face-to-face), digital
libraries, and new “virtual universities” make education available to
students cheaply, and at any place or time? Or might the Web
threaten higher education more than save it? Will nimble for-profit
providers, who now increasingly use the Internet to deliver corporate
training, soon turn to the education market and compete with traditional colleges and universities? If so, how might higher-education
institutions respond to this challenge? How will they acquire the
hardware and software needed to offer high-quality educational services at prices they can afford? And how can faculty quickly adapt to
styles of teaching and learning that, for example, emphasize interactive mentoring instead of traditional lectures?
This report is the product of a small RAND study that attempted to
frame and develop some answers to these questions. It is intended
both as a broad review of ongoing and planned applications of the
Internet and Web in higher education, and as an analysis of key
technical and educational issues—as well as broader social issues—
that these applications highlight. We hope that this report will
stimulate discussions regarding the costs and benefits of Web technologies in learning, the different models these technologies offer for

iii

iv

Untangling the Web

providing education, and the changing relationships between traditional institutions of higher education and a new generation of
providers.
This paper was completed in fall of 1996 (with minor updates prior to
official RAND publication in early 1998) and reflects the state of Webbased tools and practices in higher education at that time. Because
the world of cyberspace is evolving rapidly—“virtual” generations are
measured in months, not years—examples, Web links, and even institutions discussed in the paper may be quickly out-of-date or extinct. The central ideas and issues, however, should have a much
longer life, hopefully framing discussions until the Millennium and
beyond.
Decisionmakers who are concerned with these technical and policy
issues are a main audience for this report. It should also be of interest to academic, research, and business professionals who are concerned with applications of information technology in education and
the social implications of those applications.
The study was sponsored by the California Education Round Table.
It was carried out under the auspices of RAND Education, directed by
Dr. Roger Benjamin.
For further information on this study, contact
Roger Benjamin (Roger_Benjamin@rand.org),
Matthew Lewis (Matthew_Lewis@rand.org), or
David McArthur (David_McArthur@rand.org).
This report is also accessible on the World Wide Web at
http://www.rand.org/publications/MR/MR975/
In the online version, the Web sites mentioned here are represented
by active links to the sites themselves.

CONTENTS

Preface .........................................

iii

Figures .........................................

ix

Summary .......................................

xi

Chapter One
INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW ....................
A Qualified Vision ..............................
Qualifications on the Vision: Why the Road to
Revolution Might Be Rocky ...................
The Plan .....................................
Chapter Two
BENEFITS FOR LEARNING AND INSTRUCTION DELIVERY ..
Reducing Costs and Increasing Productivity...........
CAI and CBT ................................
Distance Learning ............................
Internet Impact: Distance Learning, Cost Reduction,
and Increased Access ........................
Reflection: The Death of Distance As a Barrier to
Learning .................................
Increasing Quality and Productivity .................
CAI and CBT ................................
Intelligent Tutoring Systems ....................
Interactive Learning Environments ...............
Internet Impact: Turning Expensive Stand-Alone
Systems into Cheaper Distance-Learning
Technologies ..............................

v

1
2
5
6
9
9
11
12
15
20
24
24
27
29

32

vi

Untangling the Web

Reflection: Many Interesting Options, Many Hard
Choices ..................................
Chapter Three
IMPROVING THE CREATION OF INSTRUCTION AND
LEARNING MATERIALS .........................
Expanding Traditional Methods of Production .........
Digital Libraries: New Media, New Services, New
Institutions ...............................
Tools to Find and Organize Information ............
Aggregating Single Libraries into Mega-Libraries .....
Obstacles to Building Productive Digital Libraries .....
Digital Publishers: Jumping into the Future or Holding
onto the Past? .............................
Internet Impact: Innovative Ways to Create New
Instruction and Learning Mateials ..............
Challenges to Building Productive Individual
Publishing Communities in Higher Education .....
Reflection: Many Interesting Options, Many Hard
Choices: A Reprise .........................

34

39
39
42
43
45
47
49
53
55
58

Chapter Four
CREATING CONNECTED EDUCATIONAL COMMUNITIES .......

61

BioMedNet: An Example of Electronic Communities ....
Virtual Universities: Old Wine in New Bottles? .........
Athena.....................................
GNA ......................................
Reflection: Networked Communities and HigherEducation Goals ...........................

63
66
67
69

Chapter Five
COMPETING WITH NEW EXTERNAL PROVIDERS OF
EDUCATION..................................
What Are External Providers? ......................
Microsoft Takes Over ...........................
Training Model Versus Higher-Education Model .......
Reflection: Higher Education, External Providers, and
Information Technology: Flight, Fight, or Friends? ..
Flight......................................
Fight ......................................
Friends ....................................

71

75
75
77
79
80
81
82
84

Contents

Chapter Six
ADDRESSING PLANNING AND POLICY: HOW TO MAKE
THE BEST USE OF THE INTERNET AND WWW IN
HIGHER EDUCATION ..........................
Reality Check: What Really Works Now and What Will
Work in the Future..........................
What Works in Business ........................
What Higher Education Can Learn from Business .....
Policy Issues Bypassed and Those Discussed ..........
How Will Higher Education Acquire Sufficient Internet
Infrastructure?.............................
Issues and Policies for Acquiring Internet
Infrastructure .............................
How Will Individual Learners Access Internet-Based
Education?................................
How Will Higher Education Acquire Quality Courseware
and Educate Faculty? ........................
Issues and Policies for Acquiring Quality Courseware
and Educating Faculty .......................
How Will Higher Education Make Choices About New
Delivery Models for Education? ................
No More One-Stop Shopping? ...................
Processes and Products That Specialize ............
Questions in the Range of Alternative EducationDelivery Models............................
References ......................................

vii

87
88
89
91
91
92
95
98
100
102
105
106
107
107
113

FIGURES

1.1. The Internet and World Wide Web As
Communication Chameleons ..................
2.1. Information Technology and Cost Savings .........
2.2. The Open University: Mother of Modern Distance
Learning ..................................
2.3. Internet-Based Distance Learning: Today and
Tomorrow.................................
2.4. Is the Internet the Medium of Choice for Distance
Learning? .................................
2.5. The Internet As a Higher-Functionality, Lower-Cost
Way to Deliver Video-on-Demand ...............
2.6. Internet Access at the Cost of Cable TV Connection ..
2.7. Near and Far: The Many Forms of Distance
Learning ..................................
2.8. Does Distance Matter in Asynchronous Learning
Environments? .............................
2.9. Information Technology and Quality Learning .....
2.10. Online Superstar Teachers: Goodbye to the Merely
Good? ....................................
2.11. Transforming Rebel! from an Isolated Application to a
Web Distance-Learning Tool ...................
2.12. What It Might Take to Make CoVis Work ..........
3.1. Scholar As Publisher: Making Research Directly
Available to Readers Across the Internet...........
3.2. Providing Services to Manage Information in Digital
Libraries ..................................
3.3. Bigger Is Better? ............................

ix

4
10
13
16
18
19
19
22
23
25
27
31
36
41
44
46

x

Untangling the Web

3.4. Higher Education’s Fight with New Electronic
Copyright Laws .............................
3.5. Who Wins: Publishers, Readers, Both, or Neither? ...
3.6. Traditional Publishers and the Digital Enemy: Fight
or Flight?..................................
3.7. Paper Publishing Elephants Following Digital Mice? ..
3.8. The World Lecture Hall: Homepage Image ........
3.9. Grassroots Developers and Traditional Publishers: A
Marriage? .................................
4.1. Academic Technology-Planning Using Information
Technologies...............................
4.2. BioMedNet Homepage .......................
4.3. A Schematic of a Possible Information Environment
to Support the Transition to Work ...............
4.4. Athena University: A Familiar Organization in a New
Medium? .................................
4.5. Globewide Network Academy: A New Organization
in a New Medium? ..........................
5.1. Microsoft OnLine Institute ....................
5.2. Higher Education Invades Corporate Training ......
5.3. Auto U ...................................
6.1. What the Telecommunications Act of 1996 Doesn’t
Tell You ..................................

49
50
51
52
54
57
62
64
65
68
70
78
83
84
97

SUMMARY

Until very recently, discussions of the crisis in U.S. education centered exclusively on public schools in the United States; higher education has been viewed as almost trouble-free—the best in the world.
Today, however, several problems loom. Many states’ budgets for
higher education are falling, and some are poised for truly terrifying
reductions even as student populations are increasing and becoming
more diverse (in age as well as ethnic composition). At the same
time, even as resources are shrinking, industries and consumers are
demanding more of colleges. Further, a broad shift from manual
workers to “knowledge workers” means that students will require
more education; high school diplomas no longer guarantee good job
prospects. And many predict that job skills will need updating every
few years; if so, “lifelong learners” will continue to demand education and retraining throughout their careers. All these changes are
straining institutions of higher education to the breaking point.
In this report, we look broadly at the prospects of meeting some of
these challenges with a new generation of information technologies.
We review and analyze, in particular, the emerging global information infrastructure—the first pieces of which we now see in the
Internet and World Wide Web—and the multiple roles they can play
in higher education:
•

to improve learning and teaching

•

to improve the creation of instruction and learning materials

•

to create educational communities

xi

xii

Untangling the Web

•

to compete with new providers

•

to address policy and planning issues.

IMPROVING LEARNING AND TEACHING
As resources for higher education dwindle, many now look to information technologies to improve productivity by reducing the time,
money, and teaching resources needed to help students learn. In the
past, distance-learning applications have demonstrated some of the
most impressive cost savings. Several lines of evidence suggest that
the Web may be the most cost-effective way to deliver distancelearning courses in the future. Classes from the World Lecture Hall
Web site, for example, already incorporate a wealth of multimedia
material, including lecture overheads and annotations, digitized
lecture audio, digital archives of past final exams, pointers to online
libraries, and even interactive simulations that can be run at a distance. To support multi-person, multimedia dialogues in real-time,
high-bandwidth interactivity will be available soon. The new generation of Internet-based distance-learning courses, therefore,
should provide substantially richer learning experiences for students
than the current generation does. At the broadest level, an Internet
style of learning or instruction delivery will be so common that distance learning will no longer be viewed as a special form of education delivery.
Many applications of information technology in education are aimed
at reducing costs. Since Internet and Web tools will continue to drop
in cost and increase in functionality for the foreseeable future,
information technology should continue to displace more and
more faculty labor. Further, what labor cannot be displaced will at
least not have to be nearby; the Internet can connect students with
faculty and peers as easily as it connects learners with multimedia
documents. Eventually, then, most learning will be distanceindependent, and the special cases will be those that are geographically bound.
Other applications focus on the “output” side of the productivity
equation: helping students learn more or better, or to learn new
skills—skills rarely included in higher-education curricula. For example, intelligent tutoring systems, which try to capture in software

Summary xiii

much of the reasoning and knowledge of expert tutors, have led to
some dramatic improvements in student learning (e.g., SHERLOCK
provides four years of on-the-job training in 20 to 30 hours). Moreinnovative applications of information technology follow a very different principle: Instead of mimicking human tutors, they provide
rich, simulated environments that enable students or trainees to
practice skills intensively. Although today many of these applications run only on high-powered machines, emerging standards will
soon permit them to be accessed by students who might have only
low-end machines—and almost any kind of low-end machine, not
just those the original application developer envisioned.
While many applications clearly intend to help speed up learning or
improve learning of well-defined subject areas, it is much less obvious how others improve educational productivity in any simple
sense. Information technology is also a driver of educational reform,
not of productivity enhancement—unless “productivity” is redefined
to include a wide range of qualitative changes, not just quantitative
improvements. Such applications are trying to transform the processes and products of learning. For example, they might exploit new
visualization technologies to enable junior students to learn about
complex systems that previously only graduate students found comprehensible; or they could foster deeper understanding through
inquiry-based learning rather than traditional lectures, or through
collaborative learning methods that never existed before highbandwidth networks.

IMPROVING THE CREATION OF INSTRUCTION AND
LEARNING MATERIALS
In addition to providing tools for teachers and learners, information
technology can help create new instruction and learning material,
improve its organization, facilitate access to it, and speed its development. Many parts make up the traditional pipeline for producing
educational materials (and intellectual artifacts, in general), but four
are central: authors create documents; publishers mainly manufacture and market copies of these products; libraries primarily acquire,
store, and distribute copies to the nearby community; and readers
consume them. These groups have played relatively stable roles in
the publication process for decades, even centuries. However, in-

xiv

Untangling the Web

formation technology is changing their roles; and, equally important,
it is transforming the copyright and intellectual-property-rights laws
that underpin relationships among the groups.
In the simplest view of this change, new information technologies
will appear to reduce, perhaps even eliminate, the need for publishers and libraries. Traditional academic publishers have approached
the Internet very reluctantly, because the Web calls up their worst
nightmare: They sell one copy of a digital book, then all others are
produced for free with a few mouse clicks. Compared with larger
traditional publishing firms, small, grassroots publishers on the Web
appear to be more flexible providers of new digital courseware,
helping higher education to meet the rising need for “just-in-time” or
“on-demand” learning just as information technology already helps
manufacturing and services industries dramatically shorten production cycles.
Providing a location and supporting tools that encourage faculty not
only to create new online course materials but to share them with
others, Web sites such as the World Lecture Hall already demonstrate
some of this flexibility. Because the Hall is implemented as a Web
homepage, all materials from a course can be downloaded, with
minimal effort, from the Hall site to the browser’s home machine.
This copy can be edited into a new course, possibly one for a slightly
different topic and audience, using simple digital cut-and-paste
tools. The new version can be returned to the World Lecture Hall,
adding again to the materials available to be shared with the academic community. Eventually, this kind of “chaotic cooperation”
might lead to a vast collection of digital courses of progressively better and better quality, as a new generation of course creators stands
on the shoulders of the current creators.
This kind of highly informal cross-institutional collaboration has
been common in academic research. But, in the past, most highereducation institutions have been much more reluctant to share their
course offerings, informally or otherwise. Individual academic publishing, therefore, may stress or even transform existing institutional
structures, rather than simply enabling them to operate more productively without fundamental change.

Summary

xv

CREATING EDUCATIONAL COMMUNITIES
The World Lecture Hall is one of many new academic and learning
communities that are beginning to flourish across the Web.
Organized along functional lines, most of these communities are developing courseware, conducting research, and sharing curricula,
among other things. Common interests and expertise are much
more important in defining these communities than is distance,
which is largely erased by cheap, high-bandwidth connectivity. For
similar reasons, most cyberspace communities tend to ignore institutional boundaries when those boundaries interfere with emerging
functional interests. These factors are beginning to give rise to new
communities of practice that, at the very least, crisscross previous
structures and, in the extreme, can erode old higher-education
structures while building new ones.
Virtual universities, a few of which already exist as prototypes, may
be the most extensive (and certainly most publicized) examples of
electronic communities. Not extensions of existing institutions,
some of the most comprehensive virtual universities on the Internet
have been created in cyberspace almost from scratch. Although they
by no means rival their traditional counterparts in faculty size or
range of courses, online universities such as Athena are beginning to
put together digital versions of all the familiar pieces of a campus.
Like a typical university, Athena grants liberal arts degrees, has a
transfer-credit policy, and offers a detailed and surprisingly traditional core curriculum—quite consciously an attempt to capture in a
virtual version the best of traditional university structure. Athena
differs substantially from most higher-education institutions only in
its admission policy (because finite resources such as classroom
space are not an issue, enrollment is open and unlimited) and its
teaching methods.
Unlike Athena, a few groups are viewing cyberspace as an opportunity to rethink the structure of educational institutions from the
foundations up, rather than as a new tool for an existing organization. The Globewide Network Academy (GNA), one such experiment, is, in a broad sense, a mix of Athena and the World Lecture
Hall. Like Athena (and unlike the World Lecture Hall), GNA offers
more than just a collection of online courses; it also includes virtual
discussion lounges, where teachers, students, administrative and

xvi

Untangling the Web

support staff, and technical experts can engage in ongoing electronic
discussions about the academy. The student lounge also contains a
collection of links that constitute an ad hoc digital library, and another set of links to career resources. Like the World Lecture Hall
(and unlike Athena), however, GNA is not developing its own
courses. Rather, it encourages institutions and individuals to list
with GNA existing courses for online distance learning, and then
provides a collection of value-added and brokering services to help
students find the courseware they want and to put them in contact
with the providing institutions. At the same time, GNA offers support
services for teachers and contributing institutions, which are expected to improve the quantity and quality of the products GNA
manages.
In general, higher-education institutions have been reluctant to experiment with more novel designs of a GNA for using information
technology: Not only are newer ideas tougher to devise and more
expensive to implement, but digitizing old institutions may still seem
like a perfectly serviceable, and much more certain, strategy.
However, if current higher-education institutions are not interested
in conducting high-risk experiments, new external providers of educational services are more than willing to try. If they succeed, they
may make clinging to the status quo less and less tenable.

COMPETING WITH NEW PROVIDERS
For decades, providers of education external to traditional colleges
and universities have offered a variety of courses and services—from
full degrees to short courses and training seminars. Of this sector,
the biggest (over $50 billion per year) and certainly fastest-growing
(more than 15 percent per year) part belongs to companies that
provide corporate training—everything from mastering the nuances
of Windows 95 to acquiring much more generic skills in objectoriented programming, analysis, and design. Such courses generally
come from external providers specializing in training products that
make the heaviest, and often most innovative, uses of information
technology.
Higher education’s challenges in competing with these new external
providers are, if anything, exacerbated by information technology,
not eased. Information technology has helped proprietary providers

Summary xvii

reduce delivery costs to the point where even “down-market” (read:
higher-education) services can be delivered profitably. Unfortunately, higher-education institutions, as a whole, have not formulated plans to deal with the increasing encroachment of external
providers on their turf. They need to.
Several options—only a few of which have been tried seriously—are
worth considering. One approach is to shore up defenses against invaders into traditional higher-education markets by erecting protectionist barriers (such as tax supports) that discourage new providers
from entering the battle. Perhaps a more positive tactic is to improve
productivity in the face of new competition. Many of the enterprises
we reviewed—distance-learning campuses and virtual universities,
for example—can be regarded as ways in which higher education is
already trying to become more productive, sometimes by borrowing
models of delivery from the training sector and often by creating innovative models of its own.
A different strategy—to take the offensive rather than honing defenses—is inspired in part by movements of external providers into
higher education’s turf. A few institutions are beginning to respond
to the challenges posed by external providers by moving, however
cautiously, into contract training. This strategy is difficult, however,
not only because external providers have a wealth of experience,
cash, and technology, but because existing institutional policies often handicap higher education from the outset. For example,
whereas business clients frequently expect to be able to mix their instructors with college personnel, college union contracts may forbid
hiring external staff.

ADDRESSING POLICY ISSUES AND PLANNING
The preceding discussion raises a number of research questions and
policy issues about whether applications of the Internet and Web in
higher education are technically and economically feasible—and, if
so, how institutions should design their technology plans to make
best use of these technologies. We focus here on just a few key questions and policy recommendations.

xviii

Untangling the Web

How Will Higher Education Acquire Sufficient Internet
Infrastructure?
Technical feasibility poses perhaps the greatest barrier to moving
higher education onto the Internet and Web comprehensively. Many
higher-education institutions are now developing and implementing
technology plans for distance learning around technologies with
much less functionality than the Web will shortly offer—for example,
videotape sent through the mail, one-way TV (over cable channels)
augmented with two-way audio (through telephones), or two-way
video conferencing using special-purpose hardware. To some of
them, a proposal to use the Internet and Web for fully interactive,
high-bandwidth, and multimedia courseware must look very premature.
We argue that such a proposal is not premature. Further, we suggest
that commercialization, sometimes viewed as a threat to the small
academic community that used to be cyberspace, is instead a key to
making the necessary broadband infrastructure available both
widely and cheaply. To realize this opportunity, however, higher education should take the following steps—and quickly, since windows
of opportunity are beginning to close:
•

Coordinate technology plans and purchases. The simplest step
that higher-education institutions—actually, all educational institutions—should take is to change their model for technology
acquisition. Today, schools at all levels buy, piecemeal, hardware, infrastructure, software, and support services for computers and networking. When buying stand-alone computers, this
practice is merely unfortunate: Bulk purchases are much
cheaper. But when acquiring networking infrastructure, it is a
catastrophic error: Networks that cannot interoperate are nearly
useless.

•

Exploit the Telecommunications Act of 1996. State and federal
debates are now setting the stage for regulations that will influence the quantity, quality, distribution, and cost of telecommunication infrastructure and services over the coming decades.
This act, signed into law by President Clinton in February 1996,
touches on a wide range of issues that pertain to communications giants, electronic publishers, the entertainment media, and

Summary xix

educators. With the act’s passage, many think the best window
of opportunity to influence policy in ways that will benefit education is now closed. In fact, the act ignores several critical issues, delegates some decisions, and defers others to later dates.
Internet capabilities available to higher education, and their
costs, may depend on the outcome of political debates still to
come in Washington and the states. To influence these debates,
institutions of higher education should unite behind a broad,
common vision of their goals and the technology required to
achieve those goals.
•

Pursue options for inexpensive end-user machines. Even if
higher-education institutions can secure the infrastructure
needed to supply generous amounts of richly interactive courseware across the Internet, students will still need to interact comfortably and cheaply with these products. Many already can, of
course. But if education on the Internet is to be as readily available as education in the classroom, students of all ages will need
almost universal access to online courseware. Today, this is not
the case, although several options are emerging that might meet
this need: Internet appliances may drop in price to a point
where most students can afford them, universities could supply
machines for students (some already do), libraries and other
community services could provide Internet access, manufacturers might consider pay terminals (analogous to pay telephones),
and governments could use vouchers as well as other forms of
cross-subsidy. The costs and policy implications of these and
other potential solutions must be analyzed carefully.

How Will Higher Education Acquire Quality Courseware and
Educate Staff?
Universities and students who enjoy lavish Internet capacity will still
need quality Web products for learning that make good use of this
capacity; in turn, faculty will need to acquire the tools and skills with
which to create Web-based distance-learning courseware. Many
have argued that the cost of developing new products and providing
faculty education will be prohibitive, especially in view of shrinking
budgets in higher education. To the contrary, we suggest that much
of the necessary training can be accomplished within existing bud-

xx

Untangling the Web

gets, provided colleges and universities are willing to adopt some of
the following creative solutions.
•

Use existing tools and training. Many of the tools needed to develop Web-based courseware, and most of the training needed to
become proficient with these tools, are already available. We
recommend that universities adopt them rather than developing
their own. Certainly, higher education will need to revamp many
programs to help faculty acquire new teaching skills that are better suited to technology-intensive classrooms, which, in the future, will be less dominated by lecture and more driven by collaborative projects or online mentoring. But to delegate all
training on Web publishing to schools of education might risk
duplicating many services already offered by online communities—yet another case of new electronic communities that crisscross the boundaries of traditional higher-education institutions.
Higher education must find strategies for coordinating with
electronic communities, if only because much of the literature
and training they offer is good, and free.

•

Shift staff time from teaching to creating courseware. Courses
and communities might help faculty acquire skills in Web-based
courseware development, but one big question remains: Where
will the money come from to pay for the acquisition, to say
nothing of the time? We suggest that it can be done at roughly
current levels of funding, provided faculty can reallocate the time
they devote to their various teaching activities. Since information technology is slowly beginning to displace faculty by performing some of their traditional teaching roles, staff could
spend more time creating courseware. If the transition from
lecture-intensive curricula to Web-based courseware is managed
reasonably, the added course-development time may come at
little or no increased cost to higher-education institutions.

•

Nourish grassroots publication. Higher-education institutions
can also encourage the development of quality Web courseware
through tactics that help foster and manage the grassroots, or
individual, publishing that we see taking shape in online communities such as the World Lecture Hall. Universities and colleges could follow GNA’s lead, for example, and provide a common infrastructure for online courses. Perhaps they would do

Summary xxi

even better to copy proprietary institutions (such as Microsoft’s
OnLine Institute), which supply value-added services that establish goals and areas for new courseware, offer technical assistance to courseware developers, and furnish quality-control
standards. In addition, setting standards for courseware format
(to ensure interoperability) will probably be as important as establishing content standards. Overall, the intent of these tactics
must be to foster a culture of sharing in online communities of
higher education.

How Will Higher Education Choose Among Many Models
for Using the Internet and Web?
Assuming higher education has the financial, physical, and human
resources necessary to use the Web and Internet, what structures or
models should it adopt to deliver educational services? Perhaps both
the biggest blessing and biggest challenge of the Internet is that it
makes possible so many alternative models for learning, teaching,
and education delivery. We cannot recommend a single model.
Rather, we suggest that higher-education institutions examine many
possible models, choosing and tailoring those that are most consistent with their missions and financial constraints, and that also take
into account the imminent sea changes in the educational market:
the growth of new private providers, the increasing diversity of student populations, and the rapid turnover of skills in emerging knowledge-based industries.
We further recommend that higher-education institutions deliberately attempt to consider models that call into question as many features of traditional institutions as possible—for instance, the length
of courses, the size of classes, the bundling of now-separable services
such as courseware creation, delivery, and student credentialing.
Specific questions might include:
•

Is it reasonable to consider creating ultra-short courses that can
be aggregated by students into highly tailored educational experiences, on an as-needed basis?

•

To what extent, and under what conditions is it possible to develop technology-intensive distance-learning courses that offer

xxii

Untangling the Web

open (or at least dramatically increased) student enrollment,
while keeping course quality high?
•

Should all institutions be developers of educational courseware,
or is there a role for value-added course brokers and repackagers?

•

More generally, to what extent is it now technically feasible, and
economically sensible to unbundle the value-chain of educational services traditionally offered by higher-education institutions—ranging from course-content creation, to reselling, to
marketing, to brokering, to distribution?

We recommend these “what if ” experiments not necessarily because
traditional institutional structures are terribly flawed, but because
alternatives resembling familiar models are likely to be explored
while less-familiar ones go unnoticed. More than anything else, we
hope to initiate discussion of these unusual, and sometimes useful,
alternatives.

CONCLUSION
Our analysis suggests many reasons for optimism. However, we do
not regard information technologies as an unqualified answer to the
problems of higher education. Many of the most effective uses of
technologies will not improve productivity in higher education in
any simple sense; rather, they will transform the processes and
products of learning and teaching. As a result, they may threaten the
current structure of the university more than just streamline it. Such
transformations will have costs as well as benefits, and the prospect
of fundamental structural change will require that policy issues be
addressed not only by higher-education institutions but by state and
federal governments.

Chapter One

INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW

Until very recently, discussions of the crisis in U.S. education centered exclusively on public schools in the United States; higher education has been viewed as almost trouble-free—the best in the world.
Today, however, several problems loom. Many states’ budgets for
higher education are falling, and some are poised for truly terrifying
reductions even as student populations are increasing and becoming
more diverse (in age as well as ethnic composition). At the same
time, even as resources are shrinking, industries and consumers are
demanding more of colleges. Further, a broad shift from manual
workers to “knowledge workers” means that students will require
more education; high school diplomas no longer guarantee good job
prospects. And many predict that job skills will need updating every
few years; if so, “lifelong learners” will continue to demand education and retraining throughout their careers. All these changes are
straining institutions of higher education to the breaking point.
Information technologies have played a vital role in higher education
for decades. Television started sending instruction to campuses and
homes during the 1950s (remember Sunrise Semester?); before that,
radio and film were used in a wide range of courses; and computers
have populated labs in schools since the late 1960s. But only recently
has interest in educational applications of information technology,
which now includes the Internet and the World Wide Web, reached
nearly universal proportions. In the past, discussion of educational
technology was limited mainly to academic and teaching journals;
now, almost every major newspaper has devoted at least a series of
articles or a Sunday supplement to “Learning in Cyberspace,” touting
technology as a savior for education.

1

2

Untangling the Web

As veterans in the battle to move computers into classrooms, we in
the Institute on Education and Training at RAND are naturally excited by this surge of interest. But we are also anxious, because this
is not the first time technology has been touted as a savior for education, and all previous technology “revolutions” have failed, in part
because they were not, technically, great improvements on prior educational tools. Of course, past failures have not been complete
flops; after all, the use of instructional TV and computer-based integrated learning systems, for example, persists in schools and campuses, although mainly on the margin. And newer technologies,
from CD-ROM-based multimedia products to Internet chat rooms,
are potentially much more powerful than previous technologies; so
they should avoid many prior technical limitations. However, like
the previous technology revolutions, the impending informationtechnology revolution also may fall far short of expectations.
With the hope that we can help the revolution move forward, we offer here a critical, constructive review of the potential opportunities
that new information technologies afford higher education.

A QUALIFIED VISION
We admit, at the outset, that we believe that information technologies can help higher education reach many of its goals. We will go
even further to say that our vision is organized around the pervasive
use of interactive and high-bandwidth communication networks. In
particular, the model we champion is the Internet, the World Wide
Web (WWW), and its generic tools (e.g., browsers such as Netscape),
which are used to create and run applications (now often called
“homepages”). But it is not the early Web (as late as 1995), with its
static book pages rendered electronically, that we think could revolutionize education and learning. It is, instead, the emerging global
information infrastructure (GII) of dynamic Web objects that will
succeed the current Internet and WWW—a computational environment populated by many multimedia and interactive applications, as
well as human and computer agents—which will be the focus of our
discussions.
Higher-education institutions, in general, are very well represented
on the Internet. This is hardly surprising: For its first 25 years, the
Internet (until 1990 called the ARPANET) was inhabited mainly by

Introduction and Overview

3

universities, nonprofits, and government agencies. True, some colleges and smaller universities still lag behind, but the larger schools
remain among the most extensive and most sophisticated users of
Internet and Web resources—even today, as commercial sites rapidly
take over cyberspace. Put most positively, the Internet is probably
the only information-technology arena in which higher education
has more than kept pace with the business world, both in its raw capacity and its skill in creating useful products. (On a given day, the
average university classroom surely logs more Web-site “hits” than
phone calls.)
Of course, many technologies other than the Internet can and do
play important roles in education. Stand-alone computers run many
kinds of useful instructional programs; they will continue to be important as machines drop in price even as they increase in power.
And, today certainly, more educational information is delivered on
CD-ROM than through networks such as the Internet. Still, we favor
the Internet as a unique foundation for education because it will
eventually include all the functionalities of the other available tools,
and more. Rooted in relatively primitive network applications that
transfer files of text (e.g., ftp), over the past few years, the World Wide
Web has added layer upon layer of new communication protocols
and document types. Now you can find Web sites that imitate almost all other communication devices and genres—audio or video,
two-way or one-way, broadcast or point-to-point. But are these imitations? Perhaps it is better to view the Internet simply as a flexible
new medium that can merge or encompass all old (and new) information technologies. A few of the Web sites that are chameleons
masquerading as other media are summarized in Figure 1.1. (This
list was compiled in May 1997.) While the Internet can mimic moretraditional information media and genres, it also offers novel functionalities not found elsewhere—multi-user video games (such as
“Quake”; http://www.idsoftware.com/), interactive soap operas
(such as “The Spot”; http://www.thespot.com/),1 and online “chat”
rooms (such as “V-Chat”; http://www.microsoft.com/ie/chat/), for
instance.
______________
1 Some of the Web site URLs given in this document are broken at the ends of text

lines, for typographical purposes. However, they should be read as unbroken character strings with no intercharacter spaces.

4

Untangling the Web

Function

Web Site Example

Radio

NPRʼs site (http://www.npr.org/) includes many of their programs,
current and past, including newscasts updated every hour.
Net Radio (http://www.netradio.net/) permits listeners to select
different types of music, as well as “talk radio” features, at a click
of the mouse.
Both NPR and Net Radio use Real Audio
(http://www.realaudio.com/) as a helper application.

Telephone

VocalTecʼs Internet Phone (http://www.vocaltec.com/) provides
telephone-quality, point-to-point, voice communication over the
Internet. Internet Phone incurs no long-distance charges, much to
the consternation of traditional long-distance providers.

Television

Many Web sites are already devoted to commercial TV; most are
simply advertising, but several include substantial video. PBS ʼs
“Life on the Internet” (http://www.pbs.org/internet/) was a 13-part
video series made available on the Internet. It used VDOLiveʼs
(http://www.vdolive.com/) Internet video technology and servers.
HyperTV (http://www.hypertv.com/) promises to interweave
traditional TV transmission and Internet browsing. MSN
(http://www.msn.com/) acts more like a TV network than a single
TV channel or program.

Newspaper

Hundreds of newspapers are now online. Some are faithful to
their hardcopy versions; others are better designed for the Web.
In this regard, The New York Times on the Web
(http://www.nytimes.com/) falls about in the middle.

Phone book

BigBook (http://www.bigbook.com/) not only boasts a very
complete interactive Yellow Pages for the whole nation, but also
will display a map showing the location of a business, as well as
reviews offered by other users.

Billboard

CyberBillboard (http://village.ios.com/~cyber/cbbdesgn.htm) will
design and post digital billboards on the Web for customers.

Fax

There are any number of ways to send a fax on the Internet. Try
just printing, say, a Word document to a fax “printer.”

CD-ROMbased video
game

As the Internetʼs multimedia capacity has expanded, Nintendo
(http://www.nintendo.com/), Sega (http://www.sega.com/), and
other video game companies that used to distribute products
either on CD-ROMs or cartridges have made many new and old
titles available on the Web.

Intelligent
tutoring
systems

Rebel! is an interactive, exploratory environment for learning
history through simulation. It was originally configured as a
standalone application, running on a Macintosh; but it was
reconfigured to display to, and interact with, users on any
machine connected to the Web.

Figure 1.1—The Internet and World Wide Web As Communication
Chameleons

Introduction and Overview

5

Supported by emerging standards such as the Common Object
Request Broker Architecture (CORBA), new document formats (now
called distributed objects) and communication protocols will evolve
into an ever-expanding collection. These will give rise to more and
more genres unique to digital networks—products that imitate no
previous forms of communication.
If interaction is omitted, the Internet can become instructional TV; if
text and other symbolic media are omitted, it can mimic two-way
video; if multi-casting is omitted, the Internet might look like a oneon-one intelligent tutoring system; the Internet can even impersonate fax, radio, and newspapers. The ability of the emerging Internet
to encompass just about all other information technologies is potentially critical to realizing its value for higher education.

Qualifications on the Vision: Why the Road to Revolution
Might Be Rocky
In addition to discussing how this potential could be realized in
higher education, we insert a recurring theme that provides a sober
counterpoint to this promising picture. We claim that information
technology—or any profound innovation—leads to a fairly predictable sequence of events as it is adopted in society:
•

First, it is exploited as an enhancer, or magnifier. The innovation
is used to accomplish traditional practices (in manufacturing,
services industries, even education) more efficiently or productively.

•

Later, it becomes a transformer. It leads to new practices and
products, not simply better versions of traditional ones. This
shift is usually very slow and rarely smooth.

Traditional applications of new technologies can lead to improvements that are more valuable than the original version of the technology, so there is often good reason to resist fundamental change.
For example, early gas-powered vehicles designed to resemble
horseless carriages are useful. But, in the long run, the technology
affords new opportunities that can be more valuable: Cars are much
more useful. Yet this transformation is not without great uncertainty
and great cost—in time, money, and fundamental restructuring.

6

Untangling the Web

Cars dominate carriages only if we build paved roads, provide service
stations, and pass laws that govern speed and the transport of goods.
This idea is not new (it parallels the economic distinction between
process and product innovation, for example) but will arise often in
our discussions. We discuss many possible applications of information technologies in higher education. Some relatively traditional
applications are attractive in the short term because they can help
cut costs. There is certainly no reason to reject them. But innovative
applications could help solve other important problems in the long
term, even though they may not save money in the short term. The
difficulty is that some of these applications are not just technology
fixes or add-ons; they will require that the higher-education community think hard about its mission, its organization, and its willingness to invest in change—even in a time of fiscal tightening.

THE PLAN
Our discussion begins with examples that illustrate many interesting,
cutting-edge applications. But, unlike many discussions of education in cyberspace, our focus is on information technology as a tool
to help solve the central problems in higher education. We consider:
•

the need to reduce costs and to increase productivity in the face
of dwindling resources

•

the challenges of an expanding and increasingly diverse student
population (including minorities and geographically isolated
rural or inner-city populations, as well as lifelong learners who
must retool their skills)

•

the necessity of adapting to changes in industry and social demands (a broad shift away from manual laborers and toward
knowledge workers)

•

competition with a growing number of external providers—
proprietary, for-profit firms not associated with colleges or universities (often specializing in corporate training but almost always exploiting information technology).

Information technologies can affect many facets of higher education,
much as they do almost every service industry. We focus here on the

Introduction and Overview

7

opportunities that appear unique to education, ignoring many important applications. For example, we pass over the different ways
technologies already streamline student-record maintenance, budgeting, payroll, and general administration. There is already a large
body of literature on the costs and benefits to business of computer
and communication technologies, and educational applications add
few new insights to this field. Rather, we look at applications of information technologies from the inner missions of higher education
outward:
•

the benefits for learning and instruction delivery that new information technologies can promise

•

the ways in which information technologies can help provide
tools for building instruction

•

the tools information technologies can offer for improving decisionmaking and community-building within higher education

•

the manner in which information technologies can help connect
higher-education institutions to industry and society as a whole.

In these discussions we summarize available data on how technology
helps overcome important challenges to higher education. But we
also include many sidebars of current or emerging “best practice.”
Our arguments are illustrated by anecdotes, or examples, partly because they bring abstract claims to life and partly because there are
few hard data on what new technologies can really do for higher education.
We next summarize the evidence about these applications to clarify
those that are less than they seem; uncover others that may be more
promising, although perhaps less obviously so or less colorful; and
identify the hidden costs—costs that must be paid if even the most
promising uses of information technology in higher education are to
deliver what they suggest. This summary leads to a more complete
discussion of the barriers to realizing the potentials of new technologies in higher education and, finally, to some broad policy issues
that surround the resolution of these problems.

Chapter Two

BENEFITS FOR LEARNING AND INSTRUCTION
DELIVERY

Information technologies might improve learning and teaching in
two distinct ways. Just as they have made workers more productive
in business and commerce, they could reduce teaching costs or increase the speed with which learners acquire knowledge. Alternatively, such technologies might help improve the quality of
learning, rather than simply making it faster and cheaper. In this
section we first review evidence that information technologies can
improve the efficiency of learning and teaching; then we consider
how they might lead to better educational outcomes.

REDUCING COSTS AND INCREASING PRODUCTIVITY
Most discussions of computers in education look at how new technologies might improve “instruction delivery,” a management theorist’s way of saying how teachers teach and how learners learn.
Therefore, as resources for higher education continue to dwindle,
when most people think of information technologies, it will usually
be in terms of how such technologies might reduce the number of
teachers needed or cut the time (and money) it takes learners to acquire skills. A collection of cases in current practice suggests that
some technologies do indeed help improve productivity in these
ways. (See Figure 2.1.)
Current successes are subject to several qualifications. Some cost
savings are modest, others come with hidden prices (for example,
high development costs or lower graduation rates), and all depend

9

10

Untangling the Web

on careful attention to implementation in the classroom. But, although the data are still unclear, the economic logic behind the view
is relatively straightforward: Cut costs by doing more with less; that
is, hold student outcomes roughly constant (or improving) while
displacing labor (staff) with capital (here, information technology).
With technology costs continually dropping while labor costs only
rise, this trade-off appears a good one for increasing productivity.
Site/Study

Cost-effectiveness Results

Computer-Aided Instruction (CAI)) and Computer-Based
Instruction (CBT)
Orlansky and String (1979)
-30 percent reduction in time to achieve
criterion performance using computerbased instruction in military training
Fletcher (summary of 47
-30 percent time savings, 30-40 percent
studies) (1991)
cost savings, and improved
achievement using multimedia
instruction
Levin (summary of 8
-CAI proved more cost-effective than
programs) (1989)
reducing class size or extending length
of school day
-but less effective than peer tutoring
Hall (summary of 8 case
-CBT in business reduced training time
studies) 1995
40 to 80 percent compared with
traditional text-based training
-CBT in business reduced training costs
40 to 85 percent compared with
traditional training
Roberts
-IBM cut its annual training budget (over
(1991)
$1 billion) by $30 million by using CBT
Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS)
U.S Air Force

-ITS traditionally deliver high student
learning outcomes, but at a high price;
the Air Force aims to cut development
costs by 95 percent and development
time by up to 80 percent
-the result would be an overall reduction
in training costs

Figure 2.1—Information Technology and Cost Savings
(continued on next page)

Benefits for Learning and Instruction Delivery

Distance Learning
Open University, United
Kingdom (1989)
Deakin University,
Australia (1989)
Indira Gandhi National
Open University, India
(1991)

Open University teacher
training, Indonesia (1988)
Everyman University,
Israel (1978)
Teacher training at a
distance, Tanzania
(1979/1984)
National Technological
University, USA (1989)

11

-cost per graduate lower than
conventional universityʼs
-cost per student 97 percent that of oncampus student
-cost per student between 8 and 40
percent of cost at conventional
university
-student performance rates only 60
percent
-cost per student about 60 percent of
cost at conventional university
-cost per graduate estimated at one-half
cost at conventional university
-costs about one-half those at a
conventional university
-break-even point (in per-student cost) at
9,000 students in 200 courses

SOURCES: Distance-learning results summarized from Perraton (1994, p. 21); CAI
and CBT results summarized from http://www.whitehouse.gov/WH/New/edtech/
perform.html, except for Hall and Roberts results, which are summarized from Hall
(1995).

Figure 2.1—(continued)

CAI and CBT
Computer-aided instruction (CAI) and computer-based training
(CBT) have shown some ability to do more with less, by providing
learners drill-and-practice systems that replace teachers in routine
coaching tasks. These systems are most frequently found in secondary schools but also play a role in remedial math, science, and
language courses at the collegiate level, as well as in business and
military training (Figure 2.1). However, as convenient as they might
be for self-paced learning, CBT programs often do not yield dramatic
cost savings. Development costs for multimedia courseware are
usually very high, often offsetting savings in delivery, and the price of
a stand-alone computer system for each student is sometimes so
dear that labor costs must fall dramatically before any net savings

12

Untangling the Web

appears. The latter situation may change in the future, however, as
powerful machines drop roughly to the cost of a top-of-the-line TV.

Distance Learning
A few intelligent tutoring systems (ITS) also have reported cost-reductions in training. (See Figure 2.2.) But, as with CAI and CBT, development costs currently impose strong limits on their productivity
gains. In fact, the main attraction of ITS is that they may improve the
quality of learning rather than reduce costs, as we discuss later under
“Increasing Quality and Productivity.”
Today, distance learning—whereby students and teachers rely on
electronic and hardcopy media, rather than on face-to-face contact,
for at least some of their communication (correspondence courses
by postal mail are perhaps the oldest form of distance learning)—
provides probably the best examples of cost savings that are at least
partly attributable to information technologies. In this country, the
PLATO system,1 among others, pioneered distance learning in the
1960s, connecting as many as one thousand student-terminals at a
time to mainframes. Only relatively recently, however, have these
trailblazing ideas translated into reduced education costs. Several
studies (Figure 2.1) show that distance-learning courses in Asia cost
from 45 to 90 percent of the cost of conventional college classes, with
comparable student performance; costs can drop to as little as 8 percent of on-campus courses, although completion rates then also
seem to dip. Using telecommunications to offer distance learning for
over three decades, the Open University in Great Britain—one of the
first very large-scale experiments in distance learning at the highereducation level—boasts average per-student costs of around onehalf those of conventional campuses. (See Figure 2.2.) We briefly examine its success to show why, at least right now, distance learning
can help reduce costs only under relatively narrow circumstances.
The Open University: An Example in Achieving Cost Reductions.
First, the technology must allow many students to be taught at once.
Class sizes at the Open University usually exceed 200. The larger the
______________
1 For all its illustrious history, good discussions of the PLATO system are rare. One

brief but broad history can be found at http://www.tencore.com/plato.htm.

Benefits for Learning and Instruction Delivery

13

The best-known example in higher education, and most successful
example of its kind in the world, is the UK Open University. Some 40
distance teaching institutions across the world have been based on
the OU model. It's methods are well known, but it is worth
emphasizing an important aspect that is often misunderstood.
Although the OU has developed widely admired methods for the use
of teams in the design and production of teaching resources, mainly
paper-based materials, and although it still carries in many people's
minds the image of the "University of the Air," it is the UK-wide
network of part-time tutors who provide the main teaching that is
experienced by OU students. Tutorial support is provided by traveling
to quite frequent face-to-face meetings, by telephone contact, and by
feedback on written assignments. In a real sense, the formal aspects
of studying for an OU degree differ little from those experienced by
students on a conventional campus. The cost per student, however,
is about one-half that of conventional campus universities. The OU is
now exploring how best to build on its success through the emerging
advanced learning technology (ALT), in particular the use of CMC
(computer-mediated communication) for collaborative learning and
the delivery of its course materials through CD-ROM (from Mayes,
1994; http://www.icbl.hw.ac.uk/ctl/mayes/ paper10.html).

Figure 2.2—The Open University: Mother of Modern Distance Learning

class size, the greater the student–teacher ratio, which lowers labor
costs and spreads high development and initial technology costs,
leading, in turn, to productivity improvements. Break-even points—
class sizes for which the cost of distance education and traditional
delivery are roughly equal—will vary depending on, among other
things, the size of technology investment and the course being
taught. But it is a safe bet, at least for the near term, that distancelearning classes of less than 20 will rarely lead to substantial perstudent cost reductions.
Second, a substantial amount of labor must be displaced by technology. Typically, labor is over 95 percent the cost of the class; so, modest trades of faculty for machines will not substantially change
overall prices. Consequently, distance learning works best in relatively “standard” courses—math and the sciences—for which knowledge is relatively routine, can be embedded in the technology, and

14

Untangling the Web

can have much teaching delegated to it. Alternatively, to expand the
range of courses that can be taught at a distance, the use of technology should be carefully designed so that expensive labor at least can
be replaced by cheaper help. For example, the Open University
makes liberal use of tutors (replacing many full professors), either in
person or on the phone.
Third, technology should substitute for labor as simply as possible.
As the example of the Open University suggests, most low-cost distance learning does not fundamentally change the learning experience for the student, or the teacher. A computer application that
promised to play a substantial role in teaching but that also demanded broad changes in faculty skills and activities (several of
which are discussed in Chapters Three and Four) could actually increase labor costs, even while guaranteeing a savings in teacher time.
The bottom line, then, is that today’s distance-learning technology is
largely limited to imparting relatively routine skills and knowledge,
taught en masse, through relatively traditional methods. Most of the
best examples actually come from military and corporate training,
rather than from higher education. For example, large companies
such as Ford now contract for distance instruction to help their employees learn how to use tools such as spreadsheets and word processors, as well as specialized equipment. And Hewlett-Packard estimates that it saves millions of dollars each year using distance
learning to train employees more effectively and more efficiently
than with conventional methods. These examples explain why well
over one-half of distance learning now goes on not in academic settings but in businesses—a market that is expanding so rapidly that
whole TV networks are now dedicated to corporate distance learning.
The Internet is increasingly being viewed as a medium that can bring
distance learning and its cost benefits into the higher-education sector. In the next subsection, we look at the cost and other advantages
the Internet in particular can provide as a distance-learning tool for
higher-education institutions.

Benefits for Learning and Instruction Delivery

15

Internet Impact: Distance Learning, Cost Reduction, and
Increased Access
At least partly to cut costs, almost all higher-education institutions in
the United States are considering distance-learning programs,
dozens already have substantial offerings in place, and many universities are now moving in this direction. In the future, we believe
that the Internet will be the most cost-effective way to deliver a
new generation of distance-learning courses. By winter 1996,
the U.S. Distance Learning Association (http://www.usdla.org/
home.html) listed many dozens of universities with homepages outlining their WWW and Internet-based courseware. At the same time,
the World Lecture Hall, a Web site managed by the University of
Texas, has become a “virtual repository,” organizing links to hundreds of other sites that are making Web-based class materials available to anyone who is interested. (See Chapter Three for a more
complete description of the World Lecture Hall.)
Because the WWW first came online only in 1991, all these courses
are new, and there are no solid data proving the effectiveness of
Internet-based distance education. But a chemistry curriculum
drawn almost at random from the World Lecture Hall2 illustrates
some of the reasons why Web-based distance learning seems very
promising, at least “on paper.” (See Figure 2.3.) To begin with,
emerging Internet courses can include a wealth of material about the
class (lectures, exams, assignments) and references to relevant online literature (books, programs, tools such as the periodic table), all
accessible at the click of a mouse on a hypertext link. Each of these
sources can be constructed as multimedia documents, including
pictures, digitized audio versions of lectures, presentation overheads—even simulations, which can be run to give a much
more dynamic impression of processes and structures. Full highbandwidth interactivity will be available soon, to support multi-person, multimedia dialogues in real-time. The new generation of
______________

2 This curriculum was found under the “Chemistry” entries on the World Lecture Hall

homepage (http://www.utexas.edu/world/lecture/index.html) on February 22, 1988.
The course itself was at Brown University (http://jcbmac.chem.brown.edu/baird/
Chem22I/chem22i.html) on the same date.

16

Untangling the Web

Chemistry 22C is taught by Prof. James C. Baird of Brown University.
The WWW course materials, found indexed under “Chemistry” on the
World Lecture Hall, include
• online lecture notes
• lecture “overheads”
• digitized audio of actual lectures, which can be played, rewound,
replayed
• homework assignments and answers, updated weekly
• electronic archives of past final exams and answers
• pointers to online resource material.
Students access these different resources just as they do any Web
homepage: by pointing and clicking on text links.
While this example is quite complete, it did not include features found
in a few other course homepages:
• Calendar of class sessions.
Often presented as a table,
including date of the class and daily topic. The topic description
is often hypertext; clicking on it allows access to the material for
the class (lectures, overheads, etc.).
• Virtual office hours. Some professors included buttons that
allowed students to send e-mail to them or to other students in
the class.
• “Chat” rooms. In some classes, students can login and engage
in text-based discussions with other students from the class who
also happen to be on at the same time. Faculty also often prearrange virtual office hours: times at which they will be logged-on
as well.
• Video and movie clips. Video clips (usually less than a minute in
duration, given current time and space constraints) are
sometimes included in Web courseware to demonstrate complex
physical processes, for example.
• “Live” computer programs. In an increasing number of Webbased courses, students can run simulations, in addition to
viewing static lecture materials. The simulations run on remote
machines, but display on the userʼs machine, and often permit
the student to interact with the simulation and control its
execution—for instance, using forms to input simulation parameters.

Figure 2.3—Internet-Based Distance Learning: Today and Tomorrow

Benefits for Learning and Instruction Delivery

17

Internet-based distance-learning courses, in short, can mix the
graphics and video of instructional TV with a much more intimate
style of interactive mentoring than teleconferencing ever could.
Therefore, it should provide substantially richer learning experiences
for students than the current generation does.
Web-based distance learning might enhance productivity in higher
education in several ways. Most obviously, by providing a more
powerful and flexible medium, the Web should enable developers to
construct higher-quality courseware for a wider range of classes than
ever before. (See Figure 2.4, top panel.) With richer courseware,
classes for which computers once replaced only a modest amount of
labor might shortly be taught almost exclusively through technology;
and in courses in which information technology previously had no
part, it may play at least a supporting role. All this means that Webbased learning tools, appropriately used, promise to replace more
labor and, consequently, to lower faculty costs.
But less-visible features of Internet-based distance learning—costs
and standards—may enhance productivity even more dramatically.
It is reasonable to assume that if courseware built on the Web is
richer than previous distance-learning products, it might also be
more costly to deliver—reasonable, but probably wrong. Although
few realize it, the Internet is not only a better medium for learning
and interaction but a cheaper way to deliver instruction (Figure 2.4,
bottom panel)—something providers of corporate training have already figured out. For example, corporate providers are quickly
trading their old on-demand video systems for more-flexible and
less-expensive high-capacity intranets, which use Internet-style
communication on private networks to deliver full-motion video to
hundreds of viewers at once, at the click of a mouse. (See Figure 2.5.)
Schools and homes can expect similar benefits, even if they cannot
afford the high-capacity LANs of big business. High-bandwidth yet
low-cost connections to the WWW will soon come in several forms.
Many homes today can access the Internet cheaply through ISDN
phone connections, providing about 5 to 10 times the effective
bandwidth of ordinary phone lines. More interestingly, successful
trials of cable modems in 1996 promise very high-speed Internet
connections, at roughly the cost of standard cable service. (See

18

Untangling the Web

The Internetʼs promise for distance learning is based on its potential
to provide a flexible and high-functionality medium for delivering
instruction, at a cost that is now within reach and steadily dropping.
The powerful functionality is based on several features:
• Two-way interactive communication. The Internet supports
distance learning, whereby students communicate with teachers
(or technology), as easily as it enables learning where teachers
communicate to students. Generally, students learn better from
interactive courseware than from one-way instruction. Of
course, if desired, TV-style distance-learning lectures can
readily be simulated on the Internet.
• On-demand communication protocol. Courseware is accessed
on the Internet whenever the user wants it, and from wherever
the student plugs in his or her machine. No need to remember
when an instructional show is on, or even to set the VCR.
• Wide communication bandwidth. Recent advances in compression, coupled with innovative ways to use existing infrastructure (new modems that transform TV cable into full-duplex
computer connections, and ISDN as well as ADSL for copper
phone wire) will make roughly the capacity of two-way video
available to most Internet users.
Costs are dropping for several reasons:
• Hardware needed for Internet access is dropping quickly in price.
In 1995 Web access required at least a low-end PC; less than
two years later, “Internet appliances” such as WebTV
(http://www.webtv.net) permit Web surfing at about the cost of a
television plus monthly cable charges.
• Network costs are dropping to zero. Or, more precisely, the cost
of using the Internet is low and independent of distance, so it
should be just as cheap to access distance-learning material
from New Zealand as from next door. (This is why more and
more people are using the Internet for their telephone service,
to the consternation of long-distance phone companies.)
• De facto standards are making it easier to develop sharable
courseware. The WWW is rooted in a few document and
communication protocols to which most homepage builders (or,
more generally, publishers) currently adhere to. This may not
make it easier to build any single distance-learning product, but,
in the long run, it will help the community as a whole create
better courseware.

Figure 2.4—Is the Internet the Medium of Choice for Distance Learning?

Benefits for Learning and Instruction Delivery

19

VIDEO ON THE INTERNET
In some ways, Web TV resembles on-demand video systems that
some companies already use for training videos and inspirational
messages from above. Indeed, it might even be better. One failing
of corporate video systems has been the need for a user to download
the video from an archival computer (known as a server), store it on
the receiving computer (the client), and then “decompress” it before
being able to play it back with special viewing software—a process
taking anything from ten minutes to a few hours. With Web TV it
should be possible simply to click and watch.
SOURCE: The Economist, January 20, 1996, p. 83.

Figure 2.5—The Internet As a Higher-Functionality, Lower-Cost Way to
Deliver Video-on-Demand

Figure 2.6.) If this promise is realized, the much-heralded-butnever-accomplished “500 channels of cable TV” finally could turn
into something really useful. And, because they require no new and
costly infrastructure development, wireless connections, such as

CABLE MODEM TRIAL DEEMED SUCCESSFUL
A marketing trial of high-speed cable modem service conducted by
Time Warner subsidiary Paragon Cable has shown virtually no
churn among its 200 test participants and the waiting list is still
about 300 customers long. "There's a real business here," concludes Paragon's general manager. Elmira, NY, cable customers
paid a $30 installation charge and a $25 fee to receive Zenith modem units that provided access to a local database and to the
Internet. Building on their success, Paragon plans to take the service commercial in Elmira at the end of March, and Time Warner is
scouting out other likely locations for pilot programs. (Broadcasting
& Cable, January 29, 1996 , p. 48)

SOURCE: Edupage, January 30, 1996.
NOTE: Edupage can be accessed at http://www.educom.edu/. Select Publications,
then select Edupage from the available links. Select the desired issue by its date.

Figure 2.6—Internet Access at the Cost of Cable TV Connection

20

Untangling the Web

DirectPC (http://www.helius.com/), may be the most promising of
all. In short, the technical problems facing the installation of inexpensive wide-bandwidth Internet connections are all but solved; the
policy barriers, however, loom large, as we discuss in Chapter Six.
In addition to reducing educational costs, the shrinking price of delivering Internet-based distance learning should help address other
challenges for higher education. For one thing, Internet-based distance learning could be conveniently accessible to many different
kinds of learners. Part of this improved access simply means putting
more people in touch with more learning resources. A new wave of
cheap “Internet appliances” (dumb terminals dedicated to Web
browsing) should bring Internet access within almost anyone’s budget; anyone who can afford Nintendo should be able to afford the
WWW.3 And once on the Internet, all resources are equally inexpensive to browse, whether they happen to be on a homepage next
door or thousands of miles away. Equally important for improved
access is the ability of Internet distance learning to reach consumers
at any place and any time. This flexibility will be especially important, for example, to workers who want to “retool” skills at night
while working during the day.

Reflection: The Death of Distance As a Barrier to Learning
At the broadest level, an Internet style of learning or instruction delivery will, we believe, be so common that it makes little sense to view
distance learning as a special form of education delivery. Since
Internet and Web tools will continue to drop in cost and increase in
functionality for the foreseeable future, technology should, over
time, displace more and more faculty labor. Further, what labor
cannot be displaced will at least not have to be nearby: The Internet
can connect students with faculty and peers as easily as it connects
learners with multimedia documents. Eventually, then, most learn______________
3Although dropping technology costs will make the Web accessible to make many, it
may be still beyond the means of many urban poor—a group who arguably might
benefit most from access to low-cost educational services. As of 1993, only 7 percent
of households in the bottom quartile in income owned a computer. Further, recurring
Internet connection costs (still at least $20 per month in 1998) are substantial. See
How Will Individual Learners Access Internet-based Education? below and, especially,
Anderson, Bikson, et al. (1995) for further discussion of these access issues.

Benefits for Learning and Instruction Delivery

21

ing will be distance-independent, and the special cases will be those
that are geographically bound.
Perhaps more to the point, distance learning should be viewed as a
common tool in higher education, not as a separate—and esoteric—
option. And most courses should be designed to use distance learning in some capacity, and often in a variety of capacities. A wide
range of experiments in distance learning are already under way, and
they come in many forms, rather than all fitting one mold. (See
Figure 2.7.) The degree to which direct interactions are replaced can
vary significantly: Telecommunications are sometimes little more
than an add-on to classroom lectures; conversely, taped lectures may
be the centerpiece of instruction, with face-to-face tutoring serving
as a supplement; in still other cases, all discussion happens at a distance.
There is no single, obvious way to order courses from light to heavy
users of distance-learning technology. Some courses that are, for example, offered exclusively at a distance (no face-to-face interaction)
still make less use of telecommunication connections than classes
that also include some direct contact. We ordered the following list
roughly from courses that provide narrow connectivity, overall, to
those that provide rich interactions. The list in Figure 2.7 is only
illustrative; many distance-learning courses already mix and match
features and functionality in ways we do not include here.
Less obviously, examples also differ in the bandwidth of communication, as well as the degree of interactivity. Early distance-learning
courses (through postal mail) trafficked only in text, and a single interchange required days, if not weeks—not at all interactive by today’s standards. Videotaped lectures distributed from a centralized
source offer much greater bandwidth but no more interactivity; on
the other hand, e-mail discussions between teachers and students
are highly interactive but narrow in bandwidth. Some of the newest
Internet-based distance learning enjoys both broadband, multimedia connections and real-time interactions, often linking not only
faculty with students, but students with one another and with shared
online resources. While earlier distance-learning models delivered
knowledge from a centralized teacher (or “server”) to students
through narrow, slow, and separate connections, newer models look

22

Untangling the Web

Features and Functionality

Examples

- low bandwidth, noninteractive technology; no
face-to-face contact

-Pittmanʼs correspondence courses on shorthand in
the 1840s

- high bandwidth, noninteractive technology; no
face-to-face contact

-The Teaching Company (see Figure 2.10) video
and audio tapes, augmented by written course
material

- low- to mid-bandwidth, non- -early courses from the Open University (see Figure
interactive technology; some 2.2), mainly based on paper materials, and
face-to-face contact
telephone and face-to-face tutoring
- high-bandwidth, non-many corporate training courses using “Web TV”
interactive technology; some (see Figure 2.5) are centered on on-demand
face-to-face contact (tutoring multimedia courseware, but also include on-site
supplements distance
discussions
learning)
- high-bandwidth, non-many satellite- and TV-based distance- learning
interactive technology;
courses, for which classes are planned around
extensive face-to-face
regularly scheduled broadcasts
interaction (distance learning -some World Lecture Hall classes; courseware is put
supplements traditional)
online as an adjunct
- high-bandwidth, interactive
technology; some face-toface contact (tutoring
supplements distance
learning)

-some asynchronous learning courses (see Figure
2.8); students near a campus may come to on-site
tutorials

- low-bandwidth, interactive
technology; connectivity
among students and
distributed resources, as
well as among teachers; no
face-to-face contact

-educational MUDs or MOOs (see Figure 2.9),
where collections of learners (mentors and
students) engage in text-based dia logues in realtime and construct textual “worlds”

- high-bandwidth, interactive
technology; fully connected
community (teachers,
students, resources, and
experts); no face-to-face
contact (or optional)

-newer Internet-based course from the Open
University (http://www.open.ac.uk/), where face-toface tutoring can be replaced by online tutoring and
e-mail
-many courses offered at virtual universities such as
Athena (see Figure 4.4)

Figure 2.7—Near and Far: The Many Forms of Distance Learning

much more like an electronic community, tying together students,
faculty, and distributed tools in a rich, speedy web of digital contacts.
With so many variants, it is no surprise that what makes an application of information technology an instance of distance learning is

Benefits for Learning and Instruction Delivery

23

becoming less and less clear. For example, courseware such as the
chemistry curriculum in the World Lecture Hall might be used in a
distance-learning class; but right now, it is simply online material for
an on-campus course. However, merely by skipping lectures and
labs and relying on the rich Web documents to compensate for
reduced in-person contact, individual students may turn it into a virtual distance-learning course. Such individual experiments, which
probably have gone on informally for decades, now are leading to
large-scale studies that will try to gauge the importance of distance
as a barrier to learning in technology-intensive courses. (See Figure
2.8.)
It is useful to view this increasing freedom from spatial location in
terms of the progressive “unbundling” of teaching functions in
higher education as educational technologies have changed across
time. Centuries ago, when knowledge was conveyed exclusively
through an oral tradition, location was everything. With the advent
of written texts, students were freed from the need to attend lectures
(logically, but not always legally); however, other important functions, including tutoring, counseling, and evaluation, remained essentially face-to-face activities.
Now, just as books (and cars) have weakened the links between distance and learning in the past, today new information technologies
can almost break them. Since the Internet can connect students with

The Alfred P. Sloan Foundation is funding research on asynchronous learning networks (ALN) as part of its Learning Outside
the Classroom program (http://w3.scale.uiuc.edu/education/
ALN.new.html). Courses are used by students at varying distances
from campus—living on campus, within commuting distance, or
very far away. Two of the questions being examined by different
projects are
• How well do students learn as a function of distance from the
physical classroom?
• How do studentsʼ learning practices differ as a function of
distance?

Figure 2.8—Does Distance Matter in Asynchronous Learning
Environments?

24

Untangling the Web

teachers as easily as it connects students with course material, tutoring and counseling can be (and are) done through e-mail and realtime chat rooms. (See Figure 2.4.) Similarly, as reference materials
increasingly become available in digital form, students will no longer
need proximity to libraries. Evaluation and assessment also can be
done at a distance. Written products, such as essays, already are created routinely with word processors; sending them across a network
for grading can be easier than printing them and walking them into a
professor’s office. Multiple-choice as well as short-answer tests have
been computerized for years. In a pinch, even timed, closed-book
exams could be conducted using simple keystroke logging or moresophisticated Internet video products such as CU-SeeMe (http://cuseeme.cornell.edu/) for proctoring.
Again, the point is not that learning should be conducted at a distance, just that creative applications make distance less and less of a
barrier to learning. The challenge will be to discover the most effective applications of distance-learning technology and to blend them
together with traditional face-to-face transactions.

INCREASING QUALITY AND PRODUCTIVITY
While many applications of information technology in education try
to reduce costs, others focus on the output side of the productivity
equation: helping students learn more or better, or to learn new
skills—applications rarely included in higher-education curricula. A
collection of examples (Figure 2.9) illustrates several ways in which
information-technology applications could lead to better learning
and teaching outcomes.

CAI and CBT
As discussed, most successful computer-aided instruction and computer-based training applications boast of cost reductions (Figure
2.1), but a few also claim gains in the quality of student learning.
Some of these applications rely on distinctly cutting-edge technology, making lavish use of multimedia, and engaging students in
highly interactive discussions. However, other ideas are surprisingly
simple. For example, The Teaching Company (TTC) thinks that
the videotapes and audiotapes it offers can help college students

Benefits for Learning and Instruction Delivery

25

improve grades in everything from history to psychology to physics.
Of course, these tapes lack the interactivity of a good tutoring
session, but TTC is gambling that the quality of its tapes will more
than compensate: The lectures are delivered by elite, “superstar”
faculty in each field, not by merely competent professors.
Some very positive reviews of these products (Figure 2.10) may be
too optimistic. However, in the future, Web technology could clearly

Computer-based applications that change learning qualitatively come in
various types. We order these, very roughly, from those that help
students learn concepts more effectively to applications that change the
kinds of ideas students learn, and how they learn them.
System/Study
CAI and CBT
Fletcher (metaanalysis of 47
studies) (1989)

Quantitative/Qualitative Learning Results
-.50 standard deviations improvement in
achievement (IVD technology, averaged
across higher education and military training)

Kulik (review of many -overall small increases in learning, across
studies and 12 metaacademic, adult learning, and training settings
analyses) (1994)
(CBT technology)
The Teaching
Company,
http://real.org/
members/listing/
general/2048.22ab
(video and audiotapes) (1996)
Intelligent Tutoring
Systems
SHERLOCK (Katz et
al., 1993)

-as of May 1996, mainly testimonials about
dramatic learning enhancements attributable
to use of “superstar” tapes

-provides the equivalent of 4 years of on-thejob training in electronic troubleshooting in 20
to 30 hours

ACT tutors
-30 to 60 percent faster learning of
(Anderson, Corbett, et programming skills, 30 to 40 percent higher
al., 1995)
scores on tests
-one-grade (e.g., C to B) improvement in
geometry
Figure 2.9—Information Technology and Quality Learning
(continued on next page)

26

Untangling the Web

Interactive Learning Environments
Appleʼs Classrooms -studies show students wrote better, completed
of Tomorrow (ACOT) units in math more rapidly
schools (Dwyer,
-by the end of 4 years, students changed how
1994)
they did work, freely employing inquiry,
collaboration, and general problem-solving
skills
Collaborative
-young students were able to acquire
visualization (CoVis)
sophisticated understanding of climate and
project (Gomez and
global warming
Gordin, 1996)
-they were also able to use high-tech
visualization tools, engage in open-ended
inquiries, and learn collaboratively
Massively parallel
microworlds
(Resnick, 1994)

-young students were able to learn about
complex distributed systems using simulation
models run on parallel machines
-they were also able to learn general heuristics
for modeling decentralized systems

MUDs, MOOs, and
MUSEs
multi-user real-time
virtual realities; as of
1996, most still textbased chat rooms,
but an increasing
number on the Web
have graphical
interfaces (McArthur
and Lewis, 1996)

-most results are anecdotal, but broadly, MUDs
may help learning of:
-academic skills (programming, reading,
typing, writing)
-metacognitive and generic skills (scientific
method, learning to learn, help seeking)
-personal and social skills (motivation,
collaboration, trust)

Figure 2.9—(continued)

make educational packages featuring superstar instructors easier to
develop and more broadly accessible, perhaps leading to significant
improvements in teaching and learning productivity. Imagine, for
example, a course built around master lectures, digitized and put
online, and combined with complementary assignments, projects,
tutorials, and group discussions—like those already found in World
Lecture Hall courses. Taking this course through the Internet might
not be quite the same as being there in person, which would require
being a student at MIT, Stanford, or a similarly elite and pricey institution. Nonetheless, for less-fortunate students, such an online

Benefits for Learning and Instruction Delivery

27

The Teaching Company is a for-profit business that offers more than
60 audio and video courses on a wide range of academic subjects,
from science to philosophy. Most are at the college level. Their
main selling point is that lectures (the courses are in very traditional
delivery formats, with little support material) are taught by a “dream
team” of “superstar” teachers. Almost all have first-rank U.S.
university affiliations. While The Teaching Company offers no solid
evidence of student learning (in fact, they provide no tests or accreditation), they do pepper their brochures with testimonials from the
likes of Ted Kennedy, Orin Hatch, and the Los Angeles Times.

Figure 2.10—Online Superstar Teachers: Goodbye to the Merely Good?

course could be better than an in-person course offered by a secondtier university. Here, as in other areas, information technology might
lead to improvements in productivity by making truly great—not
merely competent—practitioners and their performances available
to almost everyone. 4

Intelligent Tutoring Systems
While replicating outstanding teaching performances on video might
lead to improvements in learning productivity, a much more ambitious approach is to try to capture, in software, the reasoning of
teachers. Of course, this cannot be done just by pointing a camera at
a smart talking head. Rather, the process of developing so-called intelligent tutoring systems (ITS) begins with an expert system —a collection of heuristic rules—that is capable of answering questions and
solving problems in a given subject matter. For instance, the expert
system inside a good calculus ITS would be able to solve arbitrary
symbolic integration problems, and would do so in a way that ap______________
4 See, for example, Rosen (1981) for an economic analysis of how information

technology makes great performances widely available, increases the wealth of the
elite (at the expense of the merely gifted), and therefore shrinks the number of people
who can make a living providing information services to a small contingent. Rosen
claims that this phenomenon applies not only to entertainers and sports figures, but
(to a lesser extent) to lawyers and business executives, whose range of influence and
availability is expanded by modern telecommunications.

28

Untangling the Web

proximates how an “ideal” human mathematician would reason.
The expert system in an ITS is often supplemented with a studentmodeling capability, which can examine a student’s reasoning, find
the exact step at which he or she went astray, try to diagnose the reasons for the error, and even suggest ways of overcoming the impasse.
The potential value of such highly intelligent systems is obvious.
Indeed, for decades, the idea of supplying students with their own
automated tutor, capable of tailoring learning experiences to students’ needs at a fine level, has been the holy grail of teaching technology—with good reason. Many studies have shown that one-onone tutoring is the best way to learn. And, as the examples in Figure
2.9 demonstrate, for a few academic subjects, ITS have nearly
matched the capabilities of their human-tutor counterparts, helping
to raise students’ scores one letter grade or more.
However, while such systems show that ITS can raise the output side
of the productivity equation in education, their successes to date are
very limited. Because they try to embed detailed human-reasoning
skills, both in subject-matter areas and in teaching expertise, they
rely on advances in cognitive theory and software engineering. But
these disciplines have yielded a detailed understanding of thinking in
only a very few well-defined subjects; consequently, ITS currently are
confined to relatively simple parts of algebra, geometry, computer
programming, physics, and other sciences.
In higher education, then, ITS probably would be most appropriate
in basic freshman and remedial classes. And, needless to say, even in
these subjects, automated tutors come nowhere near the ability to
mimic superstar teachers. On the contrary, ITS are frequently called
“brain damaged” by most computer scientists, their developers included. Over time, however, ITS will get smarter and smarter.
Buttressed by advances in cognitive science, they will capture an increasing share of human-teaching expertise, and they will extend to a
wider range of subjects.
However, all evidence suggests progress here will be slow. While the
speed of computer hardware continues roughly to double every two
years, the intelligence of computer software, however you measure

Benefits for Learning and Instruction Delivery

29

it, creeps ahead at a snail’s pace.5 But this does not mean that information technology is destined to play only a minor role in helping
improve the quantity and quality of learning in higher education. It
just means that some of the most obvious ways in which technology
attempts to partially replace faculty as lecturers or tutors in a traditional classroom setting may not be the most promising ways, at
least in the short run.

Interactive Learning Environments
A glance back at Figure 2.9 suggests that some of the most successful
applications of information technology follow a very different principle: Instead of mimicking human tutors, they provide rich, simulated environments that enable students or trainees to practice skills
intensively.6 Flight simulators, the first such learning environments,
are still perhaps the most compelling ones. For decades they have
been singularly effective technologies for improving the quality of
pilot training. In the protective environment of a virtual cockpit,
pilots can perfect difficult maneuvers, trying them over and over
without fear of the deadly effects of a real-world mistake.
SHERLOCK (Figure 2.9), a descendent in spirit of these early simulators, demonstrates similarly impressive outcomes: Students can
learn electronics troubleshooting and fault-diagnosis skills in less
than one-tenth the time they previously required. While SHERLOCK
includes some important coaching supports, the basic reason that
trainees acquire skills so rapidly is simply that the system can present
students with simulated problem situations that arise only rarely in
the real world—namely, troubleshooting the complex hardware that
diagnoses faulty F-15 avionics.
______________
5Well-publicized successes of “man over machine,” such as Deep Blue’s recent win
over world chess champion Gary Kasparov, are false counter-examples. Deep Blue’s
performance relied almost exclusively on fast computer hardware. The program uses
brute-force searches and “understands” virtually nothing about the way humans play
the game. It is just this kind of understanding that automated tutors must possess if
they are to help humans learn.
6Interactive and simulation-based learning environments such as those we discuss
here are certainly not the only alternatives to ITS and systems that try to be “smart” or
human-like. A few, listed in Figure 2.9, take different approaches; for example, some
offer new “power tools” for collaborative learning.

30

Untangling the Web

Trainees do not learn these troubleshooting skills very quickly in the
field, because problems that might foster new knowledge naturally
occur, say, once every few weeks. Using SHERLOCK, such problems
can be made to order every few minutes, if necessary. More generally, this and other virtual worlds rely on the fact that one of the most
powerful ways to learn is by doing; but learning-by-doing works well
only if the world cooperates by providing the learner with a large
number of practice cases, and cases suitable to the learner’s current
level of expertise. In situations where the real world cannot be easily
controlled or does not readily cooperate, computers can now provide
rich simulated worlds, at an arbitrarily high degree of fidelity, that
can be controlled with the click of a mouse.
Such environments seem promising tools for training, but can they
work in higher education? While it is relatively easy to imagine how
simulated worlds might be useful in teaching concrete subjects such
as electronics or even physics, it is less obvious how simulations
would help in abstract or symbolic disciplines such as history, philosophy, or the social sciences. However, some innovative systems
are already pointing the way. For example, CoVis (Figure 2.9), Rebel!
(Figure 2.11), and even strategy games such as SimCity, are built on
top of complex computational models that capture key features of
the real-world dynamic systems underlying policy decisionmaking,
weather, and historical processes. True, these models do not simulate concrete physical systems; but, at an abstract level, the conceptual systems they represent also comprise dynamic cause-and-effect
relationships among a collection of variables. What a new generation
of simulation-based learning environments are doing, in essence, is
combining computational models of such processes with highly
graphical and easy-to-manipulate “visualization” front-ends.
Collectively, these environments give the learner a virtual world in
which many what-if experiments can be performed.
In theory, then, just as SHERLOCK provides trainees with a large
number of rich avionics cases, these simulations might present
learners with, say, a series of hypothetical history scenarios, some of
which may have analogs in real historical events and some not.
These technologies appear very interesting, but they are also very
new. Whether they can lead to the dramatic gains in the quantity of
learning we find with SHERLOCK remains to be seen.

Benefits for Learning and Instruction Delivery

31

Rebel! is an interactive, exploratory simulation environment for learning
history—in particular the American Revolution—by playing what-if games (e.g.,
“What if the British had sent over more troops?”). Using it as a stand-alone
system, students start the simulation, then set certain parameters (to
operationalize their questions), either by loading scenarios that define
collections of values or by changing them individually. Next, the system runs,
and, as simulation time steps forward, the student views the virtual world
unfold in a series of graphical depictions of simulation state changes. At any
point the student can interrupt the run and click interface buttons that help give
a better understanding of cause and effect: what was happening, and why.
We transformed Rebel! from an isolated simulation (running and displaying on
the same machine) into a distributed one (running on a remote machine, and
displaying on a local one) using the following procedure:
• The initial homepage shows, on the local interface, a picture of the initial
Rebel! interface (saved as a GIF file, referenced in the HTML code for the
page).
• The initial page also includes a Begin button, which, when clicked, triggers a
script that causes Rebel! to begin running on the remote machine; it also
invokes a new HTML page—the initialization page.
• The initialization page allows the user to select from pre-existing scenarios
and to set values for specific parameters. When the form is complete, the
user clicks the Run button. This invokes a script that ships all the
initialization data back to the remote machine, where the Rebel! process is
waiting for it. On the remote machine, the simulation parameter values set
by the user on the local machine are then read in, and the remote Rebel!
simulation run actually starts.
• As the simulation runs, it periodically updates its state and writes (actually,
creates on the fly) a new HTML document (representing the simulation
state), and puts it into the output file, to be displayed on the studentʼs local
machine.
• HTTP protocol on the local machine polls the remote machine at regular
intervals, looking for an updated interface document in the output file, and
loads it when necessary.
• “Stop” is always one option on each reloaded document. If the student
selects the Stop button, a script writes instructions to a user input file on
the remote machine, which causes the remote simulation to suspend.
• Throughout the run, a similar protocol enables the user on the local machine
to interact with the simulation on the remote one: the simulation always
looks for messages in the user input file to modulate its behavior, and the
Web browser on the local machine always updates its image of the
simulation interface by reloading the simulation output file.

Figure 2.11—Transforming Rebel! from an Isolated Application to a Web
Distance-Learning Tool

32

Untangling the Web

Internet Impact: Turning Expensive Stand-Alone Systems
into Cheaper Distance-Learning Technologies
Some of the applications that promise to help raise educational productivity by improving student learning, rather than by cutting costs,
are already network-based systems. In CoVis, for example, students
use the Internet to communicate with distant mentors, collaborate
on projects with peers, gather data from remote sites, and talk with
experts in atmospheric and environmental sciences. (See also Figure
2.12.) But many of the cutting-edge applications are stand-alone
systems that run on only one or a few computer platforms. For instance, one might work on a Macintosh but not on a PC. Even worse,
since many of these systems are still research prototypes, they may
run on only relatively high-end machines (Sun Workstations or even
supercomputers, for example). All this would seem to mean that
some of the most interesting new information technologies for
higher education will be, for the foreseeable future, either inaccessible to most students or prohibitively expensive for schools or students to acquire.
Not necessarily. One way around this problem, again, exploits the
Internet and the WWW. It is already possible for stand-alone software systems to piggyback on the near-standard protocols for creating WWW documents. In doing so, these systems can be made available very widely and relatively cheaply.
As anyone who uses the WWW knows, Web browsers and servers,
unlike most software, run on a wide range of machines. The considerable complexities of making key languages (such as HTML) and
protocols (such as HTTP) de facto standards are hidden from the average user, who can happily create documents that will appear on
any machine just about the same as they look on his or hers.7
______________
7 The universality of Web standards such as HTML and HTTP is more fragile than it

might appear. Even the simple current versions of these protocols do not run on all
machines. Future versions threaten to be even less general. For one thing, different
groups are extending the basic standards in many incompatible directions; for
another, the pressure to develop highly interactive Web objects quickly is speeding up
the pace of innovation, which works against the slow processes of achieving a broadconsensus standard. That said, the current HTML and HTTP standards are far closer
to a universal standard for complex computational objects than anything we have
seen before.

Benefits for Learning and Instruction Delivery

33

Technically, only WWW documents enjoy this relative machine independence. However, using scripting languages (e.g., CGI) that
enable programs to be initiated on remote machines and new homepages to be created and loaded on the fly, it is possible to turn almost
any piece of educational software into a distance-learning application.8
The cleverness needed to turn isolated software into sharable distance-learning systems on the WWW might be of technical interest to
some readers. (Certainly the exercise has fascinated the authors.)
But such technical subtleties miss the key point of the example:
Already, the Internet and WWW permit high-powered applications
that run only on high-powered machines to be accessed by students
who might have available only low-end machines—and almost any
kind of low-end machine, not just those that the original application
developer envisioned.
The future looks even more promising, on several scores. First, as already noted, ultra-cheap Internet appliances should bring down access cost even further. Second, the protocols needed to make products widely sharable across the Internet, using almost any hardware
platform, are quickly falling into place. Tricks now required to turn
the WWW into an interactive medium will soon lose their appeal,
primarily because new Web tools, and languages such as Java, for
building “live computational objects” (it is misleading to call them
“documents” any longer), will soon provide primitives that make this
kind of interactivity easy to achieve rather than a challenging problem to solve.
All this may mean that higher education can have its cake and eat it
too. Most of the current cutting-edge information-technology applications we reviewed promise to help students learn better or faster,
or both. Improving educational productivity in this sense is clearly
an important goal for higher education. But, until recently, this goal
seemed at odds with others: reducing the cost of delivering education and increasing access to education by an increasingly diverse
population of students. Without question, in the future, most appli______________
8 See Figure 2.11 for an example of how we turned Rebel! into a Web-based history

simulation that could be run on one (high-end) machine but displayed on a variety of
other (low-end) ones.

34

Untangling the Web

cations of technology in education that offer exciting possibilities for
transforming teaching and learning will continue to be developed in
corporate and university research settings on high-end machines.
And these will probably remain expensive, well beyond the means of
almost all students and even most higher-education departments
and computer labs. However, high-bandwidth networks, coupled
with increasingly standardized software languages and communication protocols, and with ever-cheaper Internet terminals, should
bring these cutting-edge applications within reach of learners and
teachers who do not have access to the newest and fastest technologies.
This does not mean that poor students will enjoy all the same access
to technology-based learning as wealthy ones, of course. There will
always be computers that offer more functionality at a higher price.
And even if high-quality educational materials could be accessed by
anyone on any machine at any time, nothing right now prevents
providers from metering this access and charging whatever the market will bear. (Nor, necessarily, should providers be prevented.
These and related policy issues will be examined in Chapter Six.) The
point, however, is that information technology by itself will no longer
be a significant barrier to access; if anything, the WWW and Internet
should be a force toward greater access to and equity in education.

Reflection: Many Interesting Options, Many Hard Choices
Certainly information technologies do more than provide better
tools with which to deliver instruction and learning materials in
higher education, but such tools still dominate the field of educational technology. We have discussed (or at least pointed to) a wide
range of these applications, focusing especially on those that exploit
the WWW, or could do so. Stepping back from the many specifics,
several general points should be emphasized.
First, it should be obvious that information technologies offer many
different ways to improve instruction delivery, not just one. Looking
just at distance learning, there is a rich set of options to choose from.
Selecting from the different choices demands attention to the (often
implicit) educational goals the technologies address. Some might
help higher-education institutions reduce costs; others look bettersuited to increasing access to educational resources, or to increasing

Benefits for Learning and Instruction Delivery

35

the quantity, quality, or speed of student learning. Overall, the proliferation of Internet and WWW resources should steadily bring down
the cost of all educational software products and services. Yet, some
will be more costly than others, and a few will still be very expensive
for the foreseeable future.
In general, then, it is a mistake to assume that information technology provides one or a few ways to improve learning and teaching,
and it is equally wrong to believe that technology applications will
affect just a single educational goal: cost reduction.
A third assumption, probably more widely believed, is also wrong:
that information technology is mainly a vehicle to enhance educational productivity. Look back for a moment at the last few information-technology applications described in Figure 2.9. While some,
such as SHERLOCK, clearly intend to help speed up learning, or to
improve learning of well-defined subject areas, it is much less obvious how others are trying to improve educational productivity in any
simple sense. Instead, they are generally trying to transform the processes and products of learning. For example, they might exploit new
visualization technologies to enable junior students to learn about
complex systems that previously only graduate students found comprehensible; and they might foster deeper understanding through
inquiry-based learning rather than traditional lectures, or through
collaborative-learning methods that simply never existed prior to
high-bandwidth networks.
In short, here information technology is a driver of educational
reform, not of productivity enhancement—unless productivity is redefined to include a wide range of qualitative changes, not just
quantitative improvements.
That these applications transform processes and products of learning
more than they enhance productivity has several implications for
their adoption, implementation, and costs. Consider, from the point
of view of the developer, how many different facets of an educational
context might need to change for the potentially impressive benefits
of such applications to be realized. (See Figure 2.12.) Clearly, the
technology itself—the tools actually used by students in learning—is
just the tip of the iceberg. Other possible changes range from the
roles of teachers, to methods of evaluating learning, to deeper philo-

36

Untangling the Web

sophical views of how learning happens and what constitutes knowledge.
Here is what the CoVis researchers say about their project and goals
(http://www.covis.nwu.edu/info/CoVis_OV.html):
“Traditionally, K-12 science education has consisted of the teaching
of well-established facts. This approach bears little or no
resemblance to the question-centered, collaborative practice of real
scientists. Through the use of advanced technologies, the CoVis
Project is attempting to transform science learning to better resemble
the authentic practice of science. . . .
The CoVis Project will explore issues of scaling, diversity, and
sustainability as they relate to the use of networking technologies to
enable high school students to work in collaboration with remote
students, teachers, and scientists. An important outcome of this work
will be the construction of distributed electronic communities
dedicated to science learning.
Participating students study atmospheric and environmental
sciences through inquiry-based activities. Using state of the art
scientific visualization software, specially modified to be appropriate
to a learning environment, students have access to the same
research tools and data sets used by leading-edge scientists in the
field.
The CoVis Project provides students with a range of collaboration
and communication tools. These include: desktop video
teleconferencing; shared software environments for remote, real-time
collaboration; access to the resources of the Internet; a multimedia
scientist's "notebook"; and scientific visualization software. In
addition to deploying new technology, we work closely with teachers
at participating schools to develop new curricula and new pedagogical approaches that take advantage of project-enhanced science
learning. "Collaborative Visualization" thus refers to development of
scientific understanding which is mediated by scientific visualization
tools in a collaborative context. The CoVis Project seeks to
understand how science education could take broad advantage of
these capabilities, providing motivating experiences for students and
teachers with contemporary science tools and topics.”
–– * ––

Figure 2.12—What It Might Take to Make CoVis Work
(continued on next page)

Benefits for Learning and Instruction Delivery

37

Here are a few of the transformations in traditional classroom
practice needed to realize these goals:
• Philosophy of learning and teaching. Learning is no longer viewed
as absorbing information but constructing meaning (instructionism
vs. constructionism); inquiry rather than drill-and-practice is the
preferred means of acquiring knowledge; and visualization as well
as text-based comprehension is a key approach to understanding.
• Teachersʼ roles (and training). Teachers act as mentors and
guides to information resources, rather than as lecturers and sole
sources of knowledge; they also must be fluent with new
collaboration and visualization technologies.
• Studentsʼ tasks. Students learn mainly through inquiry structured
by projects; most projects are done in collaboration with other
students and external experts (through network connections),
rather than individually.
• Curriculum structure. Curricula are organized around authentic
projects that embed long-term tasks comparable to those tackled
by professionals in the field; small-scale tasks, such as solving a
collection of algebra questions, are largely abandoned..
• Classroom organization. Classes are organized conceptually and
physically by projects and computer networks. As students
conduct their inquiries, the networks connect students and their
tasks to external databases and experts who are sources of
information, support, and commentary. Students spend little time
engaged in paperwork at desks.
• Evaluation strategies. Authentic evaluation strategies replace
traditional ones; students are evaluated on the basis of the quality
of their projects, rather than their scores on short-answer or
multiple-choice tests.

Figure 2.12—(continued)

All of this is roughly consistent with a simple rule we have distilled
from our own research in developing and implementing educational
technology: If a technology fits into an existing educational process
and tries to enhance existing educational products, you spend 75
percent of your time developing the technology and 25 percent worrying about all other implementation issues; if a technology tries to
transform educational processes and products, you spend 75 percent

38

Untangling the Web

of your time attending to these nontechnical, often complex, and
frequently invisible changes in institutional practice and structure.
If anything, our 75/25 rule understates some of the complexities and
costs of integrating cutting-edge applications into the classroom.
True, it does suggest that deep institutional changes might be necessary to make the best use of some information technologies.
However, it also seems to imply that we can anticipate the best ways
to use these tools in advance, and that the biggest challenge will be to
change the educational system to reflect what society knows it needs
to learn and teach.
Although this statement is probably far too optimistic, who would
have imagined a decade ago that visualization technologies or simulated worlds would open new educational experiences to learners?
By the same token, it is extremely difficult to predict with any confidence what new and interesting applications of information technology for learning will surface over the next decade, or to imagine
the kinds of institutional changes that might be necessary to best
exploit these new tools.
This is not to argue that all good applications of the Internet and
WWW to deliver education are shrouded in mystery. Again, there will
be many options to choose from. Some applications—perhaps simple Internet distance-learning tools and the next generation of ITS—
may continue to fit well into existing higher-education structures
and to reduce costs or increase teacher productivity, others may give
rise to new structures and cause us to rethink our ideas of educational productivity, and a few may transform learning in completely
unexpected ways. Shortly, we will see additional examples of unexpected applications of information technology. Chapter Six follows
up a few policy implications of this uncertainty.

Chapter Three

IMPROVING THE CREATION OF INSTRUCTION AND
LEARNING MATERIALS

Information technology not only provides new options for instruction delivery, it can also help create new instruction and learning
materials. (What is the point of electronic delivery if there is nothing
to deliver?) In turn, these new methods and tools can address some
of the key challenges for higher education, including responding
more nimbly to changes in demand and competing with new
providers. As before, information technology provides not one or
two, but several ways of improving the development of instruction
and learning materials. Some options are relatively simple extensions of current methods, while others are novel.

EXPANDING TRADITIONAL METHODS OF PRODUCTION
To simplify slightly, the traditional pipeline for producing educational materials (and intellectual artifacts, in general) has four key
components:
•

Authors create documents.

•

Publishers mainly manufacture and market copies of these
products.

•

Libraries primarily acquire, store, and distribute copies of the
products to the nearby community.

•

Readers consume the products.

These groups have played relatively stable roles in the publication
process for decades, even centuries. However, information technol-

39

40

Untangling the Web

ogy is changing these roles; equally important, it is transforming the
copyright and intellectual-property-rights laws that underpin relationships among the participants.
The simplest view of this change argues that new information technologies will reduce, perhaps even eliminate, the need for publishers
and libraries. Historically, publishers and libraries have been essential intermediaries, enabling authors and audiences to reach one another. Authors rarely possessed the tools, skills, and capital necessary to typeset their books, calculate the size of production runs, or
coordinate with vendors. By the same token, individual readers
(especially students and researchers) rarely could afford to acquire
vast libraries of literary holdings. Publishers and libraries have traditionally met these needs. However, as educational products become
increasingly digital and networked, one line of argument goes, the
latter two groups may prove unnecessary, at least from a technical
perspective.
Today, academic research provides the most-impressive examples of
how higher education is exploiting information technology to simplify the document-production pipeline. (This is hardly surprising,
considering that, as we have already noted, the Internet was an active
tool in scholarly research long before it played a significant role in
instruction.) Members of several research communities in medicine,
mathematics, and the physical sciences now publish their work, at
least in “preprint” form, on the Internet. (See Figure 3.1.) The
growth of such publications has been explosive: The first electronic
academic journals came online in 1991; by mid-1995, more than 300
populated cyberspace;1 in July 1996, according to the Association of
Research Libraries,2 there were almost 1700 electronic journals and
newsletters; and estimates ballooned to over 5000 by early 1998.3
Although individual publishers have been quick to add organization
and decoration, many of these works, in their simplest form, comprise a collection of homepages that can be read at a distance using
______________
1 For an overview of electronic journals, links to many sites of and articles on electronic

journals, as well as some current (as of spring 1995) statistics on their growth, see
McEldowney (1995).
2 See http://www.arl.org/scomm/edir/ for additional information and statistics; Dewar

(1998) offers further discussion of the progression from manuscripts to Internet Books.
3 See “Virtual Publishing,” in The Economist, January 24, 1998.

Improving the Creation of Instruction and Learning Materials

41

Researchers have made the transition from print to bits in several
steps—a process that is still continuing. In 1991 scientists at Los
Alamos National Laboratory took the first step by setting up a service to distribute “e-prints” (electronic versions of paper preprints)
over the Internet. Since then, their service has grown to handle
over 40,000 requests per day (see http://xxx.lanl.gov/).
The next step is to put the whole journal review and publication process online. Researchers now submit their articles by e-mail or the
Web, editors send them electronically to reviewers, and the final revised versions are published in an electronic journal. As a result,
turnaround time for publication is now a few weeks, not months;
subscription rates are usually a fraction of those of paper journals,
and sometimes free. By 1995, McEldowney (1995) had found over
300 electronic journals.
A third step is just now being taken. Some sites that began as
single journals are adding new publications and new functionality.
BioMedNet (http://BioMedNet.com/BioMedNet/ biomed.htm), for
example, offers researchers a library of publications, search
services to help locate titles, job listings, and several other kinds of
assistance for professionals.
(See also The Economist, December 16, 1995, p. 78, for information on electronic academic publication.)

Figure 3.1—Scholar As Publisher: Making Research Directly Available to
Readers Across the Internet

any Web browser. Provided that you know the Internet location of
an online journal, accessing the current issue (if there is one; some
electronic magazines simply accumulate publications over time) is
simply a matter of entering the address and reading what comes up
on your screen.
This kind of publication is gaining popularity for several reasons.
Cutting out the traditional publisher intermediary not only dramatically speeds up the rate at which new ideas get into “print”; it also
cuts publication costs and provides a direct link to readers, who can
access the papers from anywhere on the Internet as soon as they are
available. The audience, in turn, is often encouraged to be publishers in return, using e-mail to send feedback and reviews on articles
directly back to authors. Finally, problems of calibrating production

42

Untangling the Web

runs, disposing of unsold inventory, and dealing with unsatisfied
consumer demand simply do not arise with digital, networked publications. No longer do students and faculty need to wait for other
scholars to return copies of popular books: They simply print their
own copies on demand.

DIGITAL LIBRARIES: NEW MEDIA, NEW SERVICES,
NEW INSTITUTIONS
If libraries existed only to store copies of books and other physical
artifacts, and to share them with members of nearby communities,
then the preceding examples might suggest that such institutions are
in danger of extinction. Not surprisingly, traditional libraries are not
ready to give up the ghost just yet. Along with publishers, whose
traditional roles are similarly threatened, libraries are attempting to
redefine their functions in ways that maintain roles for them in the
delivery of information in digital, networked environments.
New digital libraries can try to go beyond being paperless versions of
traditional libraries in at least three ways. First, freed of the need to
store copies of (sometimes rare) documents, they can focus more on
services that will help students and faculty find and organize information in vast virtual collections. Second, freed of the need to
maintain collections in locations physically near their communities
of readers, they can plan to aggregate virtual holdings into more encompassing, complete, and up-to-date collections. And, third, freed
of the dominance of static print (audio and video can be digitized as
readily as can typed text), digital libraries can grapple with the complexities of representing and cataloguing new multimedia documents.
A number of projects are engaged in the important, but painfully
slow, translation of paper products into digital form. Project
Gutenberg (http://gutenberg.etext.org/), for example, aims to have
10,000 texts online by the year 2001; with a growing network of volunteers, it is now downloading about eight new titles per month.
The project’s mission is to provide universal access to texts. For this
reason, it is digitizing only materials in the public domain, and it is
using the most basic storage format: “plain vanilla ASCII.”

Improving the Creation of Instruction and Learning Materials

43

Already today, then, a student using almost any computer coupled to
the Internet can read the complete works of Shakespeare. The
National Digital Library (http://lcweb.loc.gov/homepage/new.html),
part of the Library of Congress, has used its considerable resources to
digitize several hundred thousand Library holdings. Not limited to
simple text, these holdings range from documents of the Continental
Congress, to turn-of-the-century films, to Matthew Brady's Civil War
photographs. Many students and scholars are even now making serious use of the Library’s historical collections, reference materials,
and search tools.

Tools to Find and Organize Information
As impressive as these conversion efforts are, though, even a quick
scan of the burgeoning literature on digital libraries shows that most
of the action is elsewhere. Few of the universities funded through
the Digital Libraries Initiative (sponsored jointly by the National
Science Foundation [NSF], the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency [DARPA], and the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration [NASA)]), for instance, have yet to build or acquire
substantial digital holdings. Rather, they are developing tools and
software agents with which digital libraries can be constructed and
can be effectively searched by students, faculty, and researchers.
(See Figure 3.2.)
To anyone who has browsed the WWW—which itself can be viewed
as a vast and unorganized digital library—the need for these search
and management tools is obvious. Most of the information available
on the Internet today is of questionable quality, at best. As holdings
merge, it will become more and more difficult to find high-quality
products, let alone products relevant to a chosen topic. Even more
problematic, traditional tools for managing this search probably will
not help much in new digital libraries. Quite aside from the fact that
traditional schemes barely work even today (card catalogs and huge
cross-referencing tomes almost always seem to need the skills of experienced librarians), these print-indexing tools simply do not scale
up well to multimedia documents that include several varieties of visual and auditory materials, as well as text. The hope is that a new
generation of digital library tools and software agents will be able to

44

Untangling the Web

Subject matter/content:
The content will emphasize a diverse collection, focused on earth and
space sciences, which can satisfy the needs of many different types of
users. The content will be supplied by publishers, although the project
will eventually allow all users to publish their work. A related project,
the Journal Storage Project (JSTOR), will digitize and make available
all issues from the first publication through 1990 of ten economics
journals to the NSF-UMDL.
Testbed description:
The UMDL will consider a complex array of technical and socioeconomic issues and will focus the research through the design, construction, and evaluation by real users of a testbed system. The
testbed will consist of a cooperating set of three types of software
agents: user interface agents, mediation agents, and collection
agents.
User interface agents will conduct interviews with users to establish
their needs such as what they need to know, and the breadth and
depth of the information they require. The interface agent will also
enable the user to specify areas of interest so that the system can
notify the user of items of potential relevance.
Mediation agents will coordinate searches of many distinct but networked collections by taking orders from the interface agents. This will
allow the user to search many libraries simultaneously in ways that
meet time, relevancy, and economic constraints. The mediation agents
will depend upon a conspectus that describes the contents of the
various collections on the network.
Collection interface agents are associated with each specific collection
and can handle searching within specific collections of text, images,
graphics, audio and video. Information held in the collections may be
owned by various entities, some of which may demand some control
over dissemination of contents or compensation for access to their
copyrighted material. The system design will provide mechanisms to
protect information access and support remuneration operations.
The users of the digital library testbed will include expert researchers,
students, and the general public. The library will include media types
ranging from page images to interactive, compound documents and
eventually real-time interaction with data. Critical to the exploitation of
these resources will be ongoing programs of evaluation, training, user
assistance, and outreach.
SOURCE: Excerpted from http://www.si.umich.edu/UMDL/intro.html on February
22, 1998.

Figure 3.2—Providing Services to Manage Information in Digital Libraries

Improving the Creation of Instruction and Learning Materials

45

understand multimedia documents, and that they will be as easy to
use as they are powerful. Some of these tools are little more than
user-friendly search engines, which find titles through keyword
searches. But others might fulfill, in electronic form, many of the
roles of a personalized library assistant or online note-taker. (See
Figure 3.2.)

Aggregating Single Libraries into Mega-Libraries
Another way in which libraries are trying to grow beyond their paper
counterparts is simply to merge holdings. Such aggregation rarely
happens in traditional libraries: One-of-a-kind documents are
closely guarded and are regarded as highly limited resources that curators are naturally reluctant to part with; the cost of moving, recataloguing, and repositioning artifacts usually is prohibitive; and merging libraries into a centralized location threatens to reduce access to
materials by many readers in the affected communities.
Access to materials in digital libraries, by contrast, is independent of
distance, so merging can only add to the resources available to
communities. Moreover, merging digital holdings is comparatively
trivial. Sometimes, libraries can be merged just by adding a few wellplaced menu items, and smart search tools can overcome many of
the resulting duplications that may arise from such mergings. (For
example, duplicate finds, or “hits,” can be automatically eliminated
before search results are presented to the student.) And, if mergers
are planned a little more carefully at the outset (also often aided by
digital merging and interface-building tools), users can be presented
an interface with the look and feel of a single digital “mega-library”
rather than a collection of smaller ones, each with a different interaction protocol.
Today, even the largest digital libraries are small; while the Library of
Congress houses over 100 million “traditional” artifacts, its online
counterpart, the National Digital Library, “houses” a few hundred
thousand, at most. When digital libraries finally acquire substantial
holdings, they will have promise for addressing several important
goals and problems of higher education, the first being costs. Costs
could drop substantially. From a technical perspective, a document
need cost no more than the price of producing it on a nearby highquality laser printer, which would easily undercut the price of com-

46

Untangling the Web

mon university texts, not to mention rare volumes. Of course, publishers are unlikely to tolerate such indiscriminate copying of their
property, at least as copyright law now stands. However, by aggregating their acquisitions, digital college libraries are already discovering that they can use their coordinated buying power to negotiate
much more effective licensing deals than publishers are willing to
offer on books. (See Figure 3.3.)
Digital libraries can improve access to educational material even as
they reduce access cost, thereby promising to be a key component in
future distance-learning curricula. Students within a university will
enjoy better access to digital materials, in part because they will be
able to use them at any place and any time, not just in library study
halls; and they will not have to wait for days or weeks until popular
titles are returned to the shelf. More interestingly, as digital libraries
merge, students can access the very best materials, regardless of their
institutional affiliation.
Even if such mergers do not happen officially, students may be able
to implement them informally. Today, for example, nothing prevents University of Michigan students on the Web from accessing

LIBRARIANS, UNITE—FOR BUYING POWER
College librarians are banding together to purchase electronic
resources for their institutions. "We've found that this sort of group
purchasing power has really enabled us to leverage the dollars that
we have and to get resources we couldn't have otherwise," says an
associate librarian at the University of Texas at Austin, which buys
publications through the TexShare consortium. The group buying
arrangement is also advantageous for publishers, who don't need
to spend as much on marketing: "As a group, we'll pay the vendor
more money than they can realistically get by slogging it out school
by school," says the executive director of OhioLINK, which includes
more than 40 colleges and universities. The president of Britannica Online figures that more than half of the 293 institutions using
his product are doing so under consortium-based licenses.
(Chronicle of Higher Education, February 9, 1996, p. A21)
SOURCE: Edupage, February 11, 1996.

Figure 3.3—Bigger Is Better?

Improving the Creation of Instruction and Learning Materials

47

digital holdings at Stanford, MIT, University of Illinois, or any of the
other dozens of online libraries. For that matter, nothing prevents
any Internet user—say, an unemployed worker in Detroit or a
teenager in Harlem—from perusing these digital documents.
This may not be true for long, however. It is quite easy for universities to put up “firewalls,” which permit access only to their students
and faculty. Technically easy, yes, but perhaps hard to justify; digital-library resources, unlike books, are simply not “consumed” when
used. With well-designed library servers and ample bandwidth, the
hundreds of authorized users of a digital library should not notice a
thousand or more unofficial users.
All of this would suggest that the best world of all would be one with
a single digital library, located at a single site (or perhaps distributed
throughout cyberspace), and surrounded by a collection of smart,
user-friendly, library tools and software agents to help find digital resources, piece them together into new documents, and share them
among students and faculty. If bigger is better, why stop at merging
just a few digital collections?

Obstacles to Building Productive Digital Libraries
For several reasons, this vision of the future is a long way off, even if
it is a good one. To begin with, different universities and different
communities may simply want to retain different digital documents;
local decency laws, as well as informal cultural preferences, will continue to encourage diversity, and sometimes insularity, in digital
holdings. Even discounting regional preferences, some important
technical hurdles still need to be overcome.
A completely universal digital library presupposes standards for representing the different kinds of multimedia information that make
up the digital documents. The de facto standards for WWW homepages (namely, HTML and HTTP) are a good first step in this direction, but they are a long way from being complete. Indeed, closure
may be a receding goal, because new data formats and media types
are being spawned faster than standards for existing ones are being
settled. It is also important to remember that few of the artifacts now
in traditional libraries (so-called legacy materials) have been digitized; they must be included in any digital library that even pretends

48

Untangling the Web

to supplant a paper-based one. On top of all this, digital materials,
no less than paper products, are subject to decay and deterioration
(Rothenberg, 1995).
Although the technical problems are substantial, perhaps the biggest
obstacles to building digital libraries are legal and institutional.
Higher-education institutions have a long history of independence in
the way they provide services. Even if economic and social arguments point toward merging digital libraries, whether universities
will enthusiastically embrace changes that might threaten their institutional identity is not clear—especially if they can convince themselves that sharing their knowledge base will lose students, and thus
revenue, to competing schools.
Finally, copyright problems could kill the development of digital
libraries in their infancy. Over decades, copyright law has forged a
delicate balance between the interests of publishers and those of
consumers, with libraries in the middle. First-sale doctrine permits
libraries to lend books without requiring libraries or readers to further compensate publishers and authors. Similarly, over time,
libraries have negotiated extensions of fair-use laws that allow students and faculty to (photo)copy materials without violating copyright. Current copyright law is not particularly generous to consumers, and a direct application of it to digital documents, if possible
at all, would certainly not give readers the more-or-less free and unlimited copying privileges that are tacitly assumed in the scenarios
we just sketched.
But even these rules would be preferable to some of the revisions of
copyright now being drafted with digital materials in mind. The 1994
“Green Paper” put out by the Clinton administration’s Intellectual
Property Working Group, for example, would require readers to pay
by use: Each time a copyrighted digital document was copied—including (the publishers hope) copies cached on a local machine
whenever a document is browsed on the Web—publishers would be
compensated. If these kinds of changes are enacted, students and
faculty will be required to pay each time they skim virtual shelves
that hold recent issues of digital periodicals. Far from looking like
progress, this future could be a big step backward in public access to
knowledge: How many university libraries charge admission to their
reading rooms? Cyberspace-savvy academics fear, with good reason,

Improving the Creation of Instruction and Learning Materials

49

that digital libraries will never thrive if copyright law is rewritten to
be balanced so heavily in favor of publishers. (See Figure 3.4.)

HIGHER ED GROUPS EYE ELECTRONIC COPYRIGHT BILL
Representatives from higher education associations testified last
week before a House subcommittee, urging lawmakers not to pass
new electronic copyright rules before their impact on colleges and
universities can be assessed. At issue is a revised definition of
"fair use" of copyrighted digital materials that threatens to
eliminate or severely restrict online interlibrary loans, and would
also prevent professors from using such materials as part of their
courses. (Chronicle of Higher Education, February 16, 1996, p.
A26)

SOURCE: Edupage, February 18, 1996.

Figure 3.4—Higher Education’s Fight with New Electronic Copyright Laws

DIGITAL PUBLISHERS: JUMPING INTO THE FUTURE
OR HOLDING ONTO THE PAST?
Publishers, of course, see the threat very differently. To them, the
Internet calls up their ultimate nightmare: The U.S. Library of
Congress buys one copy of a digital text for its collection, makes the
copy available on interlibrary loan to any other library or patron (just
as libraries generally do today), whereupon, since bits are so easily
reproduced, every reader can manufacture his or her own copy with
a few mouse clicks. In this scenario, the first sale of a digital book
might well be the last. While admittedly fanciful, this extreme example holds more than a grain of truth. Copyright law can afford to
be more generous when built-in barriers—the machinery needed
to reproduce tapes, the time and cost of photocopy paper, for
instance—provide natural disincentives to duplication. But these
disincentives are largely gone with digital products. So, today, most
publishers spend as much time defending themselves against the
Internet as they do creating products for it. (See Figure 3.5.)

50

Untangling the Web

BOOK PUBLISHERS WORRY OVER THREAT OF INTERNET
Publishers may not be feeling panic, but they are clearly edgy
about the prospects of new technology, which many consider as
potentially significant as Gutenbergʼs development of moveable
type.
Their chief concern is the improvement of computer technology
that will make it easier and faster to scan books.
In statements to the House Subcommittee on Courts and Intellectual Property Rights, the Association of American Publishers
fretted about a new world: "although not wanting to be melodramatic, publishers do fear for their future, and the well-being of
their authors, when looking at a world with low-cost, easy-to-use
ubiquitous scanners, copiers and binders."
The publishers group commissioned several studies on the issue,
including one that concluded that there is no practical way to
"unilaterally prevent" unauthorized distribution of books.
Instead the association is pressing for methods to detect copyright
violations with a "uniform file identifier system."
It is essentially a license plate on copyrighted work that contains
the publisher's name and the identity of the person who purchased
the work. The publishing industry is backing legislation before the
House and Senate to make it a criminal and civil offense to alter
these cyber license plates. Even they are not quite sure what form
the identifying codes will take, but they do know they want them.
SOURCE: New York Times on the Web, CyberTimes, March 18, 1996.

Figure 3.5—Who Wins: Publishers, Readers, Both, or Neither?

Over the past few years, this fear has slowly started to transform
through a variety of other emotions and actions: uncertain acceptance (Figure 3.6, panel 1), careful study (Figure 3.6, panel 2), strategic mergers (Figure 3.6, panel 3), and hasty exits (Figure 3.6, panel 4).
Still, recognizing a booming educational software market whose retail sales may have climbed as much as 50 percent in 1995 (to over
$500 million), traditional publishing houses, together with some
fresh competitors, are beginning to sell substantial quantities of new
products to higher education.

Improving the Creation of Instruction and Learning Materials

51

PUBLISHERS WARILY EYE THE NET
Members of the Association of American Publishers have decided that they
must become actively involved in the deployment of online information
distribution systems, or get left behind in the dust. Up until now, worries
over rampant unauthorized dissemination have resulted in "significant
hesitation about investing" in electronic publishing, says the chairman of the
AAP's Enabling Technologies Committee. Now, they've decided to try to
resolve copyright issues "before copyright infringement on the network
becomes very widespread and assumed to be the way the network works.
Itʼs a recognition that whereas in the past, publishing members of the AAP
have been able to leave technological concerns to suppliers—such as
compositors, typesetters and printers—in networkpublishing we cannot
leave it to others."
SOURCE: Chronicle of Higher Education, June 23, 1995, p. A18.
COLLEGE TEXTBOOKS—PAST HISTORY?
Publishing CEOs to Address the Future of College Textbooks at ConTEXT
'96. With the increasing presence of distance learning programs, custommade course packs, and multimedia tools in higher education, the future
form of learning materials remains a big question. To address some of these
issues, chief executives from three publishing companies will share their
insights and ideas on the future direction of the textbook publishing industry
during ConTEXT '96: A Conference on Textbooks and Technology.
SOURCE: EDUCOM UPDATE, January 15, 1996.
LEARNING COMPANY PREFERS BRODERBUND TO SOFTKEY
The Learning Company has accepted a new merger offer from Broderbund,
rejecting a rival offer from Softkey, the Cambridge, Mass.-based company
that has little regard for the Learning Company's management. A top
Broderbund executive says, "We believe that the management of the
Learning Company is one of its key assets. We're looking at a merger with
a successful company that is doing a lot of things right. The last thing we
want to do is alter that chemistry."
SOURCE: New York Times, November 9, 1995, p. C3.
MURDOCH SELLS EDUCATIONAL PUBLISHING GROUP
Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation is selling HarperCollins Publishing to
the U.K.-based media conglomerate Pearson PLC. A Smith Barney analyst
says that "Educational publishing doesn't fit News Corp.'s image as a global
distributor of information. Rupert has a lot of different objectives, and this is
not one of them." Pearson PLC will now rank fourth in educational book
publishing, behind McGraw Hill, Macmillan, and Harcourt-Brace.
SOURCE: New York Times, February 10, 1995, p. 19.
Figure 3.6—Traditional Publishers and the Digital Enemy: Fight or Flight?

52

Untangling the Web

Conservatism, however, still seems the order of the day, in at least
two senses. First, the initial reaction of many large publishers has
been to simply follow the lead of the pioneering academics, who are
abandoning paper journals in favor of just-in-time electronic versions (Figure 3.7), following the “if you can’t beat them, buy them”
strategy: Some small and informal online publishing sites are being
acquired by professional publishers. BioMedNet (Figure 3.1), for example, initially the brain-child of a few researchers, was taken over
by Current Science, a small but fast-moving new publishing firm that
specializes in value-added electronic products. Second, while publishers certainly will develop more and better digital products for
higher education—BioMedNet has grown from a single digital journal to a rich, online community, for example—the processes by
which new titles are created in the future probably will not be much
different from what they are now.
To find places where information technology is changing the ways in
which learning materials are created in a big way, we must look at a
much smaller scale: the individual publisher.

MCGRAW-HILL PLANS ELECTRONIC ACADEMIC PUBLISHING
McGraw-Hill, the publishing and information services company, is
considering the development of electronic academic journals that
could be published more quickly and economically than traditional
academic journals. An enthusiast about information technology,
McGraw-Hill chairman Joseph Dionne says: "If you take this technology, you have someone submit his research, have it reviewed
by knowledgeable people, the process could be done in a week or
two weeks." He says he has approached such groups as the
Society of Physics and the Society of Chemistry, and "there is a
very real possibility that it is going to happen over the next five
years." (Financial Times, October 16, 1995, p. 19)

SOURCE: Edupage, October 17, 1995.

Figure 3.7—Paper Publishing Elephants Following Digital Mice?

Improving the Creation of Instruction and Learning Materials

53

INTERNET IMPACT: INNOVATIVE WAYS TO CREATE
NEW INSTRUCTION AND LEARNING MATERIALS
Consider again the World Lecture Hall, a virtual repository of online
course materials. We discussed in Chapter Two how specific courses
here might be part of a new generation of distance-learning class
materials. But we look now at the Hall itself, rather than at its constituent products (Figure 3.8), to see how new instruction and learning materials are created.
The most prominent feature of the Hall is a large table that organizes
specific courseware by subject matter. It is much like a standard
university course catalog, except that the offerings are full sets of
course materials, rather than brief course descriptions. The Hall
also provides tools that allow new courses to be easily searched and
added, and a “What’s New” link to identify the latest entries (a very
valuable resource for frequent browsers, since hundreds of courses
already reside at the Hall).
The World Lecture Hall demonstrates two very powerful benefits of
information technology for education—one already widely touted,
the other less so. Relatively familiar is the idea that new technologies
encourage individual, home-grown production. In higher education,
we have seen such production in electronic journals that bypass
traditional publication bottlenecks, as well as in online courses constructed by individual faculty almost from scratch, using digital
materials. Outside education, the examples are often even more
compelling. Today, for example, audio and video desktop publishing
puts at one’s fingertips the facilities that just a few years ago were
available only to large, well-funded professional studios. Using these
tools, small grassroots print-journalists, moviemakers, and record
producers are already making significant inroads into markets traditionally dominated by big players. There is no reason to believe that,
at least on technical grounds, educational publication and the creation of instructional materials will be immune to these sea changes.
The second feature has more to do with the World Lecture Hall itself,
and the cooperative curriculum development it can encourage, than
with the nature and origins of its constituent online courses. The
Hall attempts to provide a location and supporting tools that will encourage faculty not only to create new online course materials, but to

54

Untangling the Web

The World Lecture Hall is a Web site managed out of the University of Texas. Its main feature is a large table that organizes
several hundred courses, alphabetically, by subject name. Users
select a subject link, which then leads to a page listing all specific
courses of that type. These course links, in turn, can be followed
down to their component pieces: lecture notes, tests, and so on.
The World Lecture Hall encourages new course submissions,
which may be completely original or modifications of courses
already resident. However, as of 4/97, it provides relatively few
tools for users or developers beyond a “Whatʼs New” link that lists
recent additions, a simple search facility, and the table of course
offerings itself. The Hallʼs developers apparently do not review
courses offered by developers, follow other policies for quality
control, or provide tools to help consumers find and compare
products.
SOURCE: Image excerpted from http://www.utexas.edu/world/lecture on February
28, 1998.

Figure 3.8—The World Lecture Hall: Homepage Image

share those materials with others. Because the Hall is implemented
as a Web homepage, all materials from a course can be downloaded
(a trivial process) from the Hall site (which happens to be in Texas) to
the browser’s home machine. Using simple but very powerful digital
cut-and-paste tools, this copy can be edited into a new course—possibly for a slightly different topic and audience, and, perhaps also a

Improving the Creation of Instruction and Learning Materials

55

better product. In any case, the new version can be returned to the
World Lecture Hall, adding to the materials available to share with
the academic community. Eventually, this kind of chaotic cooperation might lead to a vast collection of digital courses of progressively
better quality, as a new set of course creators stands on the shoulders
of the current creators.

Challenges to Building Productive Individual Publishing
Communities in Higher Education
How likely is this rosy future? On the one hand, early indications
seem promising. It was quite possible that when the World Lecture
Hall was established (in 1994), no one would have come to the site.
At its inception, the Hall contained very few online courses, and so
had little value to browsers. But, by late 1996, the Hall contained
several hundred courses; according to its managers, dozens of offerings flow in each month, and the pace is increasing. In short, at least
this communal repository of digital instructional material demonstrates what economists refer to as positive “network externalities”:
the more users adopt the product, the more valuable (but not more
scarce) the product becomes for other users.
On the other hand, most home-grown products—whether in the
form of videotapes, audio recordings, or Web homepages—suffer
from a common problem: Although their creators view them as
priceless, few others may. Just as once we were bored to tears by our
neighbors’ vacation slide shows, today most Web surfers are frustrated by the thousands (now probably millions) of homepages that
serve only to hide the few gems they seek. In the case of virtual collections such as the World Lecture Hall, it is likely that if potential
consumers (who may also be producers) cannot find quality digital
course materials, they will cease browsing this site (and adding to it).
If so, the number of new entries will decrease, and, with fewer shoulders to stand on, the overall quality of offerings is unlikely to improve
quickly, if at all. In this future, the World Lecture Hall, far from
flourishing, would probably disappear within a few semesters.
Whether or not such sites foster a productive community of grassroots publishing in higher education will depend on a number of factors. Luck and good timing may play a role. If, for example, home-

56

Untangling the Web

grown sites develop strong early products, they may attract the
attention and new contributors needed to sustain them through their
formative period. Also, even if quality products exist, they must be
easy to find. Internet search engines and smart agents already help
consumers locate useful sites and ignore irrelevant ones. Providers
also have several means at their disposal to simplify search and improve product quality. Passive tools, such as the World Lecture Hall’s
table organization and “What’s New” option, help make navigation
easier for consumers.
Other providers (although not the World Lecture Hall) take more active steps, preferring to control the quality of products they include
in their collections, rather than just relying on consumers to cut
through irrelevant materials with search tools. One ingenious, simple idea that virtual Yellow Pages (BigBook, for example, at
http://www.bigbook.com/) are trying is to rely on consumer popularity to organize products and shape the market by letting users rate
any business in their database and permit new buyers to see these
reviews. Although this strategy has not been applied to educational
courseware databases, the implementation would probably be very
simple; however, the long-term consequences of using such a quality-management scheme would certainly be far from easy to predict.
Taking a more traditional approach, electronic journals such as
BioMedNet have instituted formal peer-review procedures.
Similarly, many of the electronic discussion groups on Usenet (the
newsgroup side of the Internet) are moderated, rather than uncontrolled. Moderators can play a wide range of roles: reorganizing and
packaging submitted materials, editing copy, adding commentary,
and even censoring contributions outright. All this sounds very much
like the value-added functions of traditional publishers. It hardly
comes as a surprise, therefore, that publishing firms, seeking to redefine their roles in the digital age, are now seeking partnerships
with developers of home-grown online course materials for higher
education. In addition to ensuring quality and packaging of new
products, many publishers are planning also to market the courseware, secure copyright agreements, and arrange licensing. (See
Figure 3.9.)

Improving the Creation of Instruction and Learning Materials

57

UNIVERSITY ONLINE
University Online, a small Internet publisher that licenses 200 readymade high school and college courses, is working with George
Washington and George Mason Universities to create tutorials and
more online courses at the higher education level, and is seeking
more universities for similar alliances. The company's president is
working with textbook publishers to obtain the electronic rights to
their materials, and will then pay the publishers' royalties and split
the tuition with the universities that license its products. ( The Wall
Street Journal, February 24, 1996, p. B5D)

SOURCE: Edupage, February 25, 1996.

Figure 3.9—Grassroots Developers and Traditional Publishers: A Marriage?

Individual publishing on the Internet is so new that it is difficult to
determine how significantly it will contribute to the creation of new
instruction and learning materials. If it flourishes, however, this innovative approach could speak to several important goals and problems of higher education, such as the need for just-in-time and ondemand learning.
Home-grown publishing is now technically feasible because information technologies greatly simplify constructing, editing, and
sharing of documents, which may invite the creation of many lowquality products. But, suitably channeled, high-volume and highspeed production also has its good side. Obviously, the easier it is for
individual faculty members to create courseware (or to tailor existing
materials into new packages), the more they will be able to offer diverse materials to an expanding and increasingly divergent student
population. Responding to a nearly overwhelming need for remedial
instruction, for example, faculty from the California State University
system might be able to put together a fresh physics curriculum in
short order by combining some of the simpler digital simulations,
assignments, and exams from any of the more than 25 physics
courses now online in the World Lecture Hall.
This same flexibility could permit institutions to build new courseware and learning products that respond to the rapidly changing
demands of industry—not, assuming popular predictions are right, a

58

Untangling the Web

one-time effort. Former Labor Secretary Robert Reich, among others, claims that workers will need to retool for up to five job changes
per career. If so, rapid changes in instructional materials will be the
rule for the foreseeable future; and the versatility that new information technologies bring to educational production will be critical for
meeting these demands.
In short, just as information technology already helps manufacturing
and services industries to dramatically shorten production cycles
and to help solve the challenge of just-in-time academic publishing,
it could enable higher education to meet the demand for just-in-time
or on-demand learning.

REFLECTION: MANY INTERESTING OPTIONS,
MANY HARD CHOICES—A REPRISE
Viewed broadly, information technologies might change the ways
instruction and learning materials are created much as they could alter the ways instruction and learning are delivered: by providing
many different kinds of applications, not just one or a few. The applications could speak to a variety of goals and problems in higher
education, helping to reduce costs, enrich and diversify course offerings, expand access, and increase responsiveness to industry
demands and social needs; and some of the most valuable uses of
information technology will not simply improve educational productivity, but will require institutions to consider moderate or extensive
structural transformations.
For example, by digitizing library holdings, universities can expect to
save space, reduce acquisition costs, seamlessly combine multimedia documents with traditional text, and provide students and faculty
with a new generation of tools for finding information and organizing
it into intellectual products. However, although a single university
can benefit from digitization, cross-institutional cooperation may be
critical if digital libraries are to make the best-quality materials
available to students and to reach the broadest audience. As we have
noted, copyright problems will challenge this kind of library merging,
as will barriers between higher-education institutions.
By the same token, smaller, grassroots publishers on the Web, rather
than larger, traditional publishing firms, look to be nimbler providers

Improving the Creation of Instruction and Learning Materials

59

of new digital courseware that will meet changing industry needs.
But, at least today, the individual publication process is chaotic, to
say the least. In the World Lecture Hall, for instance, faculty often
cut and paste new curricula from previous offerings, with little concern for copyright or institutional origin. This kind of highly informal
cross-institutional collaboration has been common in academic research. Nevertheless, in the past, most higher-education institutions
have been much more reluctant to share their course offerings, informally or otherwise. So, as with digital libraries, individual academic publishing may stress or even transform existing institutional
structures, rather than simply enabling them to operate more productively without fundamental change. 4
A slightly different way to view all this is that the Internet is beginning
to foster new academic and learning communities across the Web,
most of which are organizing along functional lines: developing
courseware, conducting research, sharing curricula, for instance.
Common interests and expertise are much more important in
defining these communities than is distance, an impediment that
cheap, high-bandwidth connectivity largely erases. For similar
reasons, most cyberspace communities tend to ignore institutional
boundaries when those boundaries interfere with emerging functional interests. These forces are beginning to give rise to new communities of practice that, at the very least, crisscross previous
structures and may even erode old higher-education structures
while building new ones. We discuss such communities in the next
chapter.
______________
4 Or not.

Perhaps the individual publishers will be transformed by existing
institutional standards rather than change them. How freely authors will actually
share their online curricula with others, for instance, remains an open question.
Historically, the academic community, compared to for-profit publishers, has
followed a very open policy. This may be changing. For example, increasingly, faculty
are copyrighting their World Lecture Hall products; if enforced, these copyrights
may have a chilling effect on cooperative courseware development. This and other
intellectual property rights issues are discussed above in the section called Obstacles
to Building Productive Digital Libraries.

Chapter Four

CREATING CONNECTED EDUCATIONAL
COMMUNITIES

Chapters Two and Three consider how information technologies can
contribute to two well-defined higher-education missions (delivering
and creating instruction) and, in so doing, can address some major
challenges that higher education now faces. But the preceding chapter discussed how the Internet, in particular, might play a much
broader role: fostering electronic-learning communities. Not surprisingly, the potential effects of such communities on specific educational problems are much tougher to gauge than are those of more
well-defined technologies, such as distance learning. For one thing,
these communities often emerge spontaneously, rather than as part
of a deliberate plan aimed at specific educational goals. Moreover,
since Web-based groups are so new, it will be some time before we
see which key problems in higher education they might help solve, if
any. And, if online communities do help improve educational outcomes, almost certainly they will do so not simply by reducing labor
costs and increasing the productivity of traditional higher-educationdelivery systems, but by transforming learning and teaching
practices.
In spite of these uncertainties, electronic-learning communities are
worthy of attention, because, if they realize even a fraction of the
benefits BioMedNet or the World Lecture Hall seem to promise, they
will indeed make a substantial mark on higher education.
If you scan the WWW for online educational communities, it quickly
becomes apparent that, however formative they may be, they are
also ubiquitous. We have reviewed communities that conduct and
publish research and share curricula; but others are appearing

61

62

Untangling the Web

to fulfill almost every information-based function associated with
higher-education institutions, both within and across traditional
organizational boundaries. Within institutions, for example, governance and administration issues are being discussed not just through
academic committee meetings but also using various network technologies, including e-mail, organized electronic discussion groups,
real-time chat rooms, and Web pages. (See Figure 4.1.) Just as in
other businesses, information technologies may cut out layers of
academic middle management and give faculty more-direct input
into institutional decisionmaking. This use of information technology to flatten organizational structure, which is hardly novel in business, is still rare in “cloistered” universities.
Internet applications such as these might help improve the flow of
information within higher-education institutions and help accelerate
internal decisionmaking. Perhaps the most interesting feature of
most successful online communities, however, is that they often start
small, with a single purpose (such as administration), then expand—
not only attracting a larger collection of participants, but also adding
functions. In this chapter, then, we briefly present a few such
emerging communities, noting how they might address key challenges for higher education, but also keeping in mind how tentative
these possibilities are, at least today. We first look at some of the vir-

The University of California, Davis is using Web pages to help
create a new Information Technology Strategic Plan (see
http://it.ucdavis.edu/). The root page includes links to current versions of parts of the strategic plan, service guides and reference
materials, University technology reports, as well as links that route
browsers to any of UCDʼs current Information Technology
Operating Units (e.g., The Center for Advanced Information
Technology). All these links provide background material for faculty and Information Technology Strategic Planning Committee
members, who can contribute to the ongoing planning and design
process. Some of the planning was conducted in focus groups
and face-to-face community meets. But later deliberations were
conducted using online forums.

Figure 4.1—Academic Technology-Planning Using Information
Technologies

Creating Connected Educational Communities

63

tual communities that have been around the longest—those in academic publishing.

BIOMEDNET: AN EXAMPLE OF ELECTRONIC
COMMUNITIES
BioMedNet (Figure 4.2) began its virtual life as a single electronic
academic journal in 1991. Today, bolstered by the Web, which
permits a richer collection of materials to be placed online (the early
electronic journals relied mainly on text, and e-mail-like communication protocols), and an infusion of capital, BioMedNet has expanded its functionality to include an online library of publications,
a shopping mall (which links to companies that sell products of interest to this community), a collection of collaboration tools, and
even an electronic bulletin board of job opportunities. (See Figure
4.2.) Virtual discussion groups and online conferences are the most
recent additions to this growing community.
BioMedNet and many of its contemporaries look at once familiar and
novel. The individual services they provide all have analogs in traditional academic communities: Libraries permit faculty and students
to take out books on loan, meeting rooms are available for conferences, administration offices can arrange purchases on individual or
institutional accounts, and department bulletin boards post flyers
that announce new academic positions. However, several features
may make the online versions more powerful than their analogs.
One feature is that the pieces of and participants in these online
communities can be seamlessly combined. BioMedNet offers
higher-education faculty in biological and medical science almost
“one-stop shopping” for professional needs: In a couple of hours,
professors might be able to catch up on the latest journal publications, read critical reviews, discuss new research ideas with colleagues from other countries, examine new books in their field,
check out job listings, and place orders for a variety of products.
These examples certainly do not exhaust the online services these
providers will soon offer (and which the growing communities will
soon demand). One recent addition in BioMedNet, for instance,
permits members to create their own virtual rooms within the community. These rooms can contain a profile (which helps BioMedNet

64

Untangling the Web

SOURCE: Image excerpted from http://biomednet.com/ on February 26, 1998.

Figure 4.2—BioMedNet Homepage

suggest products and people of interest), details of their credit-card
accounts (to facilitate electronic purchases), monthly billing statements (with a complete record of past purchases), and a community
e-mail account (for corresponding with BioMedNet members only,
not the Internet at large).
If designed properly, some virtual parts of electronic communities
may actually do much more than their paper counterparts do, not
simply provide the same services more conveniently. For example,
job listings do not need to be (and in some Web sites are not) limited
to static announcements of required qualifications and pay ranges.
Links can permit Web applicants to visit homepages of potential
employers, or even to take online tests and interviews. They can

Creating Connected Educational Communities

65

draw into a growing community a wide range of educational stakeholders who rarely talk to one another. As the environment sketched
in Figure 4.3 suggests, information technologies already provide, for

Pre-Employment Training/Education:
: Studentʼs View
Pre-training Student:
(Consumer of training)

School: Supplier of Training
Database of
Placement history
courses offered, etc

Course Planners
Job Placement

Database of
available employees

Credential/
Certification
Instructors

Suppliers of
Curricula &
Training Tools

Database of
available positions

External Credential/
Certification

Employer
Database of
Skills forecasts

In-house
training
Strategic Planning:
Forecast of
skill needs

Personnel
Office
Operations:
Immediate
skill needs

Information Flow
Trainee Path

This information environment was designed as part of a RAND
transition-to-work study. One of the main goals of the research was
to provide models for how network technologies could help increase
the bandwidth and flexibility of communication among students,
schools, and the workplace. Implemented as Web homepages, the
prototype system connected a local vocational school, and its
students, to nearby employers. As part of the work, the project also
showed how several kinds of databases, describing schools,
students, skills, and jobs, could be constructed to add substantial
value to the network as a whole.

Figure 4.3—A Schematic of a Possible Information Environment to Support
the Transition to Work

66

Untangling the Web

example, tools that help students learn about employment opportunities, let employers converse with candidate workers, and enable
schools to keep up-to-date about the changing needs of the job market. And the more these networked communities extend to new participants and link them in different ways, the more new communication technologies appear to be redefining the educational communities, rather then just streamlining communities that already exist.
It is a good bet that more-expansive communities—communities
that fulfill even more-innovative functions and encompass a broader
collection of stakeholders than existing communities, such as
BioMedNet—will appear shortly. At present, however, the best, or at
least the most complete, of these electronic communities seem focused on research and academic publication rather than on other
missions of higher education. This focus may be beginning to
change, as some institutions start to take the idea of combining educational functions in electronic communities to its logical conclusion: the virtual university.

VIRTUAL UNIVERSITIES: OLD WINE IN NEW BOTTLES?
While the realization of an entire virtual university seems the inevitable end-state of a movement to digitize higher education, many
institutions have been “virtualizing” themselves, in bits and pieces,
for years. Recall that the Open University (Chapter Two), probably
still the world’s largest “virtual campus” (however this loose term is
defined), has been using telecommunications to offer distance
learning for over three decades. In the past, OU and others relied
mainly on TV, radio, and telephony; today, the Internet and WWW
are the vehicles of choice as universities go online. According to
the Institute for Learning Technologies at Columbia University
(http://daemon.ilt.columbia.edu/ilt/), almost 500 universities in the
United States already have some Web presence, which, in many
cases, still means just a homepage providing a brief description of
the institution, its mission, and addresses to contact if the Internet
browser wants any real information about admissions, requirements,
or courses. The next steps beyond basic public relations often include virtual campus tours using interactive maps, digital campus
periodicals or newspapers, homepages for specific departments,
university centers and faculty, and online application forms.

Creating Connected Educational Communities

67

These sites provide prospective students with a wealth of information they can use in planning their college careers. As of winter 1996,
however, only a few established public or private universities had
“virtualized” core teaching and learning functions.1 And, of those
that had, most still limit online offerings in several ways:
•

The University of British Columbia provides online courses that
are mainly about the Internet itself, rather than about other
subjects.

•

UWired (part of the University of Washington) also weights its offerings toward net courses, and also follows the strategy of overlaying networked courseware on existing courses—the online resources are essentially enrichment materials—rather than creating stand-alone virtual courses.

•

Arcadia University boasts an attractive set of pages at its Web
site, but it offers only continuing education classes at a distance
(using video rather than the Internet).

Perhaps not surprisingly, the most complete virtual universities on
the Internet are not extensions of existing institutions but institutions that have been created in cyberspace almost from scratch.

Athena
By no means rivaling their traditional counterparts in size of faculty
or range of courses, online universities such as Athena (Figure 4.4)
are beginning to put together digital versions of all the familiar pieces
of a campus. Founded in 1995, Athena had, by April 1996, employed
about 25 faculty (some full-time and others who teach at traditional
universities) and offered courses in over a dozen subject areas. Like a
typical university, Athena grants liberal arts degrees (although it is
______________
1 This statement demands further research. At a minimum, the following questions

should be addressed: How many universities are doing more than public relations on
the Web? What kinds of services are they providing online? Who are they and what
are their strategies (existing institutions, virtualizing bit-by-bit, or new virtual
campuses created from scratch)? Answering these questions definitively, though, is
like hitting a moving target: The number of universities online changes daily. For
instance, Peterson’s (1997) Distance Learning Programs, New York, Peterson’s Guides,
Inc., counted 97 “cyberschools” in 1993; in 1997 this total was almost 800.

68

Untangling the Web

This is Athenaʼs course catalog, which provides links to specific course
descriptions, as well as to admission requirements, registration information,
degree requirements, and the core curriculum. In addition, users can quickly
link to an online student guide and faculty directory. The student guide
provides detailed instructions on how to use the online technology that makes
up Athenaʼs infrastructure. The faculty directory lists all current staff and provides e-mail links to most, and homepages and vitae for many.
Athena is administered by Virtual Online University, Inc., a nonprofit
corporation offering a novel approach to academic excellence, professional
development, and life-long learning.
SOURCE: Image excerpted from http://vou.primary.net/Catalog/catalog.html on
February 27, 1998.

Figure 4.4—Athena University: A Familiar Organization in a New Medium?

Creating Connected Educational Communities

69

still waiting to receive accreditation from a regional accreditation
body), has a transfer-credit policy, and offers a detailed, and surprisingly traditional, core curriculum. Athena differs substantially from
most higher-education institutions only in its admission policy
(because finite resources such as classroom space are not an issue,
enrollment is open and unlimited) and its teaching methods.
Like courses in the World Lecture Hall, all Athena courses rely heavily
on the Web. However, Athena courses go beyond typical WWW
homepages, which are often rich multimedia documents, but rarely
documents that permit the kind of intensive interaction among students and teachers that are the hallmark of good learning environments. Following others who seek to develop high-quality learning
environments for the Web (Figure 2.9), Athena’s idea is to mix the
richness of Web documents with the dialogue of MOOs (multi-user,
object-oriented environments), which introduce into the WWW
world of graphics, audio, and text, a communication protocol that
permits students and teachers to talk with one another across the
network in real-time, and to share multimedia “objects” as they chat.
Athena is a conscious attempt to capture the best of a traditional
university structure in a virtual version. If it acquires accreditation
and can keep costs low while continuing to offer courses to all comers, Athena could succeed in this goal.2 But Athena’s is not the only
approach to developing a virtual university, nor is it necessarily the
best one. A few groups are viewing cyberspace as an opportunity to
rethink the structure of educational institutions from the foundations
up, rather than as a new tool for an existing organization. The
Globewide Network Academy (GNA) is an example of such a
rethought institution.

GNA
The Globewide Network Academy (http://www.gnacademy.org) is
one such experiment. (See Figure 4.5.) In a broad sense, GNA is a
______________
2 As of winter 1996, however, a liberal arts degree from Athena did not come cheap at

approximately $12,000 (120 credit hours at $100 per hour). Costs may drop in the
future if Athena can attract more students while requiring relatively few added faculty.
But, even now, Athena clearly undercuts higher-education institutions (where degrees
usually cost over $25,000) and private schools (where $50,000 is rarely enough).

70

Untangling the Web

This is from an online letter by the president of GNA, July 1995:
What is the Globewide Network Academy?
The Globewide Network Academy is a federation of educational and
research institutions. We exist in order to provide a central location at
which students and teachers can find each other, and to provide
administrative support services to aid teachers in teaching.
Much of the reason for the existence of GNA lies in the belief that the
traditional departmental structure of universities is reaching the end
of its usefulness and that new organizational structures are needed if
universities are to provide education for the masses of the world with
the diminishing resources which are available to them.
Universities today are both too large and too small. An average
university is simply too large to have a coherent focus, and most
universities today are indeed composed of many sub-groups many of
whom have conflicting ideas of where the university should go. As a
result, one has huge amounts of energy being wasted in academic
politics when in becomes necessary for the university to set priorities.
At the same time universities are too small. If you go to five different
universities, you generally find five different registrar departments,
five different payroll departments, five different computational
systems, etc. etc. This leads to tremendous and costly administrative
duplication which serves absolutely no educational purpose.
At the same time, universities are facing increasing pressures from
the outside. Tuitions are rising far beyond the ability of a middle class
family to pay, and government grants for research and education are
drying up as governments face budgetary pressures. At the same
time, universities are victims of their own success as the doctoral
students that they are producing are unable to find any job openings
in traditional academia.
The purpose behind the federation model of GNA is to deal with both
of the structural problems of the traditional university so that it can
deal with the challenges that face it in the opening years of the 21st
century. GNA consists of independent members, each of whom has
their own internal finances and course and curriculum policies. The
core organization is responsible for providing computational and
administrative support as well as providing a central location for
students to find the courses that they are looking for.

SOURCE: Excerpted from http://www.gnacademy.org:8001/HyperNews/get/ documents/pres-letter.html on February 27, 1998.

Figure 4.5—Globewide Network Academy: A New Organization in a New
Medium?

Creating Connected Educational Communities

71

mix of Athena and the World Lecture Hall. Like Athena (and unlike
the World Lecture Hall), GNA offers more than a collection of online
courses; it also includes virtual lounges where teachers, students,
administrative and support staff, and technical experts can engage in
ongoing electronic discussions about the academy. The student
lounge also contains a collection of links that make up an ad hoc
digital library and another set of links to career resources.
Like the World Lecture Hall (and unlike Athena), GNA is not developing its own courses. Rather, it encourages institutions and individuals to list with GNA existing courses for online distance learning, then
provides a collection of value-adding and brokering services to help
students find the courseware they want and to put them in contact
with the providing institutions. At the same time, GNA offers support
services for teachers and contributing institutions, which, they hope,
will improve the quantity and quality of the products GNA manages.
Initial indications look promising: By 1996, GNA had already catalogued thousands of courses, contributed by almost 200 sponsoring
members (mostly American public universities—including Athena).

REFLECTION: NETWORKED COMMUNITIES
AND HIGHER-EDUCATION GOALS
Electronic communities now emerging on the Internet and WWW
may address several key goals of and challenges for higher education.
In the simplest cases, putting basic functions online will streamline
existing communication processes, helping both to reduce costs and
increase access. Enrolling through the Web, or e-mail, already saves
paperwork and administrative time; students also avoid long lines
and frustrating delays in finding courses with open spots that suit
their needs. But, although valuable, these uses of information technology with the Internet are certainly not new.
New network communities are just beginning to take advantage of
the unique characteristics of the Internet and Web to fulfill a wide
range of educational functions. Within higher-education institutions, Web-based dialogues might help open up decision-making
processes and flatten administrative structure. If lessons from the
corporate use of information technologies hold here, universities
might be encouraged to rethink more rapidly the products (courses)

72

Untangling the Web

they offer, thereby being more responsive to the needs of business.
Such responsiveness might be enhanced further if the same networks that improve communication within higher education also
provide direct links to the business community, giving students direct access to potential employers, enabling employers to query
schools for lists of promising prospective workers, and permitting
industry more of a say in academic course design.
As electronic communities continue to grow, they should help meet
more of higher education’s pressing needs. But growth means more
than expanding to include a larger number of students and faculty; it
also means connecting a broader set of stakeholders and
encompassing additional educational functions. Such growth seems
to point to virtual universities as a kind of holy grail for higher
education: a single cyber-institution that provides all the functions
of the academy, digitized and knit tightly together through highbandwidth network connections. Certainly, virtual universities look
like the logical conclusion of all this digital construction in that it is
hard to imagine a digital academy that is more inclusive in its
functions. Athena and others are deliberately attempting to build
cyber-institutions that include as many pieces as possible of existing
universities, from student centers, to libraries, to classrooms and
faculty lounges. Some even include images of virtual ivy-covered
walls. That these visions are so all-encompassing and vivid is,
perhaps, the main reason that the popular press seem to view virtual
universities as the most cutting-edge and ambitious of all
applications of information technology to higher education.
Ambitious? Yes. Cutting-edge? Not really. Certainly, building anything that has the scope of a fully virtual university is challenging to
say the least. But although the technology is thoroughly modern, the
institutions being constructed in Athena, and those planned by other
developers, are actually about as traditional as can be. GNA, on the
other hand, demonstrates that a virtual university might transform
the structure of higher education rather than simply streamlining it
or improving its productivity (in any simple sense). GNA is trying to
do more than digitize the past: while it replicates some conventional
functions (e.g., virtual student lounges), a few familiar functions are
distributed or eliminated (e.g., databases collect courses from other
higher-education institutions; GNA does not create them), and still

Creating Connected Educational Communities

73

others seem quite new (e.g., GNA’s brokering services to connect
providers with consumers).
None of this suggests that GNA is more likely to succeed as a virtual
university than Athena. Both may succeed or fail. And, in any case,
their fates may have little to do with their underlying structures.
The comparison is important in that it illuminates two broader
points. First, network-based information technologies can be used
to deliver educational services in many different ways. Athena and
GNA are two options, but doubtless others soon will surface that are
more radical than GNA in the way they reorganize traditional functions of higher education—partnering with more-global institutions
for digital library services or offering education on a “per-concept”
basis, rather than providing whole programs of study, for instance.
With equal certainty, other virtual universities will appear on the
Web that are as traditional as Athena. It is in the nature of a flexible
new technology such as the Web that it can be as easily configured to
mimic an existing institutional structure or medium (Figure 1.1) as it
can be crafted into a novel structure. If anything, repeating the past
with new technology is easier than devising new designs, which takes
considerable creativity, and substantial hard testing and refining to
prove.
This brings up the second point. Many public and private highereducation institutions have been reluctant to experiment with novel
applications of information technology, not only because they are
tougher to devise and more expensive to implement, but because
digitizing old institutions may still seem like a perfectly serviceable,
and much more certain, strategy. However, if current higher-education institutions are not interested in conducting high-risk experiments, new external providers of educational services are. If they
succeed, they may make holding to the status quo less and less tenable.

Chapter Five

COMPETING WITH NEW EXTERNAL PROVIDERS OF
EDUCATION

Higher-education institutions may be skittish about the uncertainties associated with innovative uses of information technology to
build learning communities. But a growing collection of external
providers—mainly proprietary, for-profit institutions—are embracing them. A brief review of these external providers can yield several
insights for higher education, allowing them to size up the competition, suggesting some concrete models of technology-based reforms
worth borrowing, and even offering opportunities for collaboration
as well as strategies for competition. Because the literature on these
new providers is scant, we limit ourselves to discussing just a few examples.1

WHAT ARE EXTERNAL PROVIDERS?
The proprietary training sector covers a wide range of schools and
providers. Some grant degrees; others offer only short courses and
______________
1 Surveying external providers would be a worthy research topic. Many basic ques-

tions beg answers:
•
•
•
•

How many of these online external providers are offering contract training?
How many are now shifting over to offering “serious” higher-education courses?
How are growing demands for “knowledge workers” affecting the demand for
these providers?
What will new business practices that rely on them look like (presumably
decentralized, networked, transformed by information technology itself)?

An understanding of external providers would give higher education a better
foundation for thinking about how to train knowledge workers and, therefore, how to
compete (or partner) with new providers that are already training them.

75

76

Untangling the Web

training seminars. Some focus on routine clerical, sales, and cosmetics skills; still others offer professional classes in law and architecture. About the only feature all share is that fees and tuition cover
costs, since none is supported directly through taxes. Because their
operations are so different, it has been difficult to measure the size of
this sector in relation to public and private academic institutions.
Clearly, however, it is a large and growing sector. California alone
now boasts thousands of proprietary schools (compared with 200 or
so traditional higher-education institutions), bringing in an estimated $1.4 billion in tuition as of 1992. This sector promises to expand substantially because, in the future, businesses (not individuals) will be the primary clients. In 1994, businesses spent roughly $50
billion on training. Whereas much of that training was done inhouse in the past, it is increasingly being outsourced to external
providers.
Probably the biggest, and certainly the fastest-expanding, part of this
sector belongs to companies providing training in using new information technologies. In 1995, corporations in the United States
paid over $15 billion in information-technology training, a figure
that will probably grow about 15 percent per year to over $30 billion
by the end of the century. Such courses cover everything from
mastering the nuances of Windows 95 to acquiring much more
generic skills in object-oriented programming, analysis, and design.
Not surprisingly, the courses are not only about high technology but
use that technology, originating, generally, with external providers who specialize in training products that make the heaviest,
and often most innovative, uses of information technology. Some,
such as The Teaching Company (Figure 2.10) and Learning Tree
(http://www.lrntree.com/) offer thousands of computer-based training (CBT) course products, most created to meet the needs of large
corporate clients. Microsoft, Intel, Novell, and other large software
and hardware companies also offer a wide range of training courses.
But theirs are courses tailored primarily to their own products, rather
than to clients’ interests.

Competing with New External Providers of Education

77

MICROSOFT TAKES OVER
At first glance, Microsoft’s OnLine Institute (MOLI) at
http://moli.microsoft.com/2 resembles Athena in several ways. In
some respects aiming at one-stop shopping for training, it supplies
online enrollment, certification programs, exam preparation, and a
list of Web-based courses. (See Figure 5.1.) But MOLI’s relationship
with students, course providers, and specific classes is actually anything but traditional. More like GNA than Athena, MOLI mainly furnishes the infrastructure and value-added services that organize
Web-based courses on such products as Visual Basic, C++, and Word.
Third-party online content vendors (OCVs) develop most of the interactive courseware products; different groups, called authorized
online classroom providers (OCPs), build specific classes from these
materials, adding human learning advisors and other curriculum
material as needed. Students then interact with MOLI by searching
the course-list database to find OCPs whose courses meet their needs
and whose location is suitable. (Distance matters for a subset of the
courses that include extensive face-to-face interaction with learning
advisors.) Students also can make use of various common information resources in MOLI, such as the student union, library, advising
center, and bookstore.
Just as it provides various tools to help consumers, MOLI also attends
very carefully to its suppliers. In contrast to the World Lecture Hall,
which seems to accept all course offerings it receives, MOLI
constrains course providers in at least three ways. First, the Institute
defines the topics (the Microsoft products and programming skills)
for which it will accept courseware. Second, it evaluates courseware
and classes, and admits only those OCVs and OCPs that it authorizes.
______________
2 As of October 1997, MOLI no longer resides at this location; Figure 5.1 is also
obsolete. We have retained the following discussion, however, because the contents,
products, and services of MOLI have not been abandoned by Microsoft. Rather, MOLI
has been integrated into Microsoft’s Authorized Technical Education Center (see
http://www.microsoft.com/atec), which combines both Web-based training and
traditional classroom instruction in one site. The disappearance of MOLI, therefore, is
not a testament to the short life-span of many digital ventures. On the contrary, it
underscores how readily Web-based services can be combined or transformed into
new—and presumably better—ones.

78

Untangling the Web

Third, it imposes standards for courseware development that help
ensure that Web-based content developed by different OCVs will run
on a wide range of platforms and will work well when put together
into larger course products. MOLI encourages content vendors and
course providers to meet these demands by offering tools and infrastructure, including the bookstore and library, that help create highquality products. But the primary incentive is financial: OCVs can
sell curricula to OCPs and to other interested (but not authorized)
parties through the MOLI bookstore; OCPs sell courseware directly to
individual students or corporate clients.
This model for instruction delivery has many interesting features,
some also shared by communities such as Athena and GNA, but oth-

SOURCE: Excerpted from http://moli.microsoft.com/moli/pub/areas/classroom/
aboutclass.htm on April 26, 1996.

Figure 5.1—Microsoft OnLine Institute

Competing with New External Providers of Education

79

ers that look quite new. Because MOLI has no physical infrastructure
and few labor expenses, the cost of courses is low. (It is not clear that
Microsoft makes a penny from MOLI, since its main goal is to sell
software, not training.) By carefully managing its third-party vendors, MOLI can effectively provide just-in-time training services;
vendors move rapidly to create courses for new Microsoft products,
to reach the market ahead of their many competitors. Also, like
Athena and GNA, Microsoft is concerned with assessment exams and
certification of students. However, in contrast to other virtual universities, MOLI has no concept of admission or courseload; students
simply purchase instruction as needed (or as required by their employers), course by course, if not concept by concept.

TRAINING MODEL VERSUS HIGHER-EDUCATION MODEL
All this might seem right for corporate training, but what lessons
might higher education draw from such a model? On the surface,
training is a very different sector from higher education. Most training skills are relatively narrow and well-defined, whereas skills taught
in higher education are usually broader in scope and more difficult
to quantify. Business skills also typically turn over more rapidly than
those targeted by higher education. Microsoft needs new courses every year for the many software products it creates, buys, or modifies;
university classes often stay relatively fixed, in part because the topics they address—intellectual and cultural artifacts, from philosophy
to algebra—change slowly, if at all. The sectors also differ in the
wealth of the clients they serve, as well as in the nature of the skills
they target. Businesses routinely spend much more per worker on
training than public education spends per student. Training providers can use this high profit margin to invest in new training
technology, while higher-education institutions often find the price
tag for new information technology too high.
However, these differences are diminishing; indeed, previously distinct boundaries between the higher-education and corporatetraining markets may be beginning to blur. For one thing, highereducation institutions are coming under pressure to change their
course offerings more quickly and to make them responsive to the
demands of business. The resulting curricula often focus more on
applied knowledge than do the ones they are supplanting. Corporate

80

Untangling the Web

training is also moving in this direction, although from a very different starting point. In the past, most training schemes were vocational (helping mechanics fine-tune skills on new machines, for example); today, more and more cater to knowledge workers in their
never-ending quest for life-long learning. Creative thinking and
higher-order problem solving, topics once the exclusive domain of
higher education, are slowly crowding out learning of routine procedures in training courses. Even now it is hard to distinguish, say, a
computer-aided drafting course at a proprietary school from one offered by a community college or a university.
At the same time, although today it is still easier to create courseware
for training classes on programming and using spreadsheets, information technologies are becoming increasingly useful in education classes that focus on more-complex (and less-well-defined)
problem-solving skills, as many of the Internet and Web tools we reviewed already attest. Further, as these technologies continue to
drop in price, higher education should become an increasingly profitable market for them.
In short, education and training are merging in two senses: just as
the content of training is becoming more like the content of highereducation classes, the feasibility and profitability of technologybased courses for higher education are rising to the level of computer-based training.

REFLECTION: HIGHER EDUCATION, EXTERNAL
PROVIDERS, AND INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY—FLIGHT, FIGHT, OR FRIENDS?
How, then, does information technology affect higher education’s
challenges of competing with new external providers? If anything, it
is exacerbating, not easing, them. Several strands of evidence argue
that proprietary providers already think that information technology
has helped reduce delivery costs to the point where even “downmarket” (read: higher-education) services can be delivered profitably. A growing number of companies now straddle both sectors,
in many cases offering essentially the same courseware products to
each. Academic Systems (http://www.academic.com/), for example,
has had banner years in both sectors. Just after receiving $12 million

Competing with New External Providers of Education

81

from Microsoft, TCI, and Accel Partners to develop corporate training programs that can be dialed up on a user’s home computer,
Academic Systems got high marks for its CD-ROM–based algebra
curricula in California State University classrooms.
This is just one example of what will probably be an important trend
in the coming decade. Several niches in what may eventually be a
vast market in adult learning are apparently ripe for technologybased educational services. For-profit companies are tapping each
of them aggressively. Academic Systems is marketing directly to
higher-education institutions. Others, such as The Teaching
Company, look primarily to the home market. Many of them also
offer educational software to corporate clients, for remedial instruction. Whereas, in the past, corporate training has focused mainly on
job-specific skills,3 businesses now also are under increasing pressure to provide remedial instruction for employees (for learning that
probably should have been acquired in college or even high school,
but was not). In different guises, all these growing areas are calling
for roughly the kinds of learning that higher education typically has
offered. But, except in traditional higher-education markets (young
adults coming straight out of high school), universities and colleges
are largely ceding these opportunities to proprietary providers.

Flight
Higher-education institutions as a whole have not formulated plans
to deal with the increasing encroachment of external providers on
their “turf.” They need to. These providers enjoy several advantages
over higher education that enable them to devise creative systems for
delivering training and education on the Internet and Web. To begin
with, many are technically savvy and heavily capitalized. (Today, for
example, Microsoft probably invests more in educational-technology
R&D than the federal government does.) This means that external
education providers often have both the financial and intellectual assets they need to experiment with high-risk/high-gain educational
designs. Perhaps more important, when designing schools or other
______________
3 Companies are naturally reluctant to pay employees to acquire broadly valuable

skills, since these skills will make them more attractive to other firms too, not just
more valuable to the employer.

82

Untangling the Web

delivery systems for learning, external providers have the great luxury of starting with a clean slate: no need, for instance, to assume
that classes will meet at a set time, to worry about faculty displaced
by software, nor to fight with teachers’ unions. Consequently, when
external providers craft their designs, they can focus on what the
technology makes possible and what services their clients demand,
rather than worrying about how to shoe-horn new designs into existing educational structures.
At the very least, then, these providers offer innovative models for
using information technology that higher education should attend
to. But, after learning from them, what actions to take?

Fight
One approach is to shore up defenses against invaders into traditional higher-education markets, for example, by erecting protectionist barriers that discourage new providers from entering the battle. Some would argue that the tax supports that public institutions
now enjoy do just that. Perhaps a more positive tactic is to improve
productivity in the face of new competition. Many of the enterprises
we have reviewed—distance-learning campuses and virtual universities, for example—can be regarded as ways in which higher education already is trying to become more productive, sometimes by borrowing models of delivery from the training sector, and often by
creating innovative models of its own.
A different strategy is to take the offensive, rather than honing defenses. Inspired in part by movements of external providers into
higher education’s turf, a few institutions are beginning to respond
to the challenges posed by external providers by moving, however
cautiously, into contract training. Of all higher-education institutions, the community colleges have shown by far the most initiative
here. (See Figure 5.2.) A few years ago, about half of all community
colleges did some contract training with business; today, about 90
percent do. Some community-college experts even see training as
the solution to their financial problems and expect that contract
training will become the biggest piece of the community-college
system.

Competing with New External Providers of Education

83

Still, higher education faces several imposing difficulties in this
migration, some of them technical. Corporations, for example, expect personalized, on-site training services; external providers
increasingly deliver these tailored courses through wired or even
satellite-based network technologies. Community colleges will need
comparable tools in order to offer quality courseware at a competitive per-person price that is equally responsive to clients’ needs.
Other challenges are organizational, reflecting the fact that community colleges (unlike external providers) do not have carte blanche
for building their contract training services. Business clients, for
example, frequently expect to be able to mix their instructors with
college personnel; however, doing so often conflicts with union contracts that forbid colleges to hire external staff. Also, some contracting arrangements threaten informal or formal community-college
rules requiring that the college serve mainly local needs (tough to
adhere to if contract training is shipped across the state via networks)
or demanding that classes be open to all students (senseless if
courseware is designed for specific corporate clients).

CORPORATE TRAINING
Although community colleges have been in the corporate training
marketplace for some time, they now are reaching out more
aggressively, and the American Association of Community
Colleges says that about 90% of its member colleges are involved
to some extent in the business of training workers for specific
companies, rather than just teaching generic subjects or trades.
Cost-conscious community colleges have a natural advantage
competing for this business against four-year institutions, which
may be too proud, too well-off, or too bureaucratic to show much
real interest in the training needs of the local business community.
A key indicator of successful community college corporate
programs is the college's willingness to bring instruction to the
client's workplace, rather than requiring students to come to its
campus. (David Stamps, "Community Colleges Go Corporate,"
Training, December 1995, p. 36)
SOURCE: Edupage, January 16, 1996.

Figure 5.2—Higher Education Invades Corporate Training

84

Untangling the Web

Friends
While community colleges struggle to compete with external
providers in the contract-training market, other higher-education institutions are starting to evolve different strategies, some involving
cooperative partnerships as much as competition. In this battle, the
size of long-established universities, while often a liability in times
that demand nimble change, actually can work to their advantage.
For one thing, some training needs are so vast that they attract only
the largest providers.
For example, in 1996, Michigan announced a large-scale educational
program that would use the Web to deliver a wide range of courses.
(See Figure 5.3; also see http://www.mvac.org/.) Centered around
the Virtual Michigan Auto College (Auto U), the idea is to help train
the next generation of auto-industry workers, and thus to keep the
industry firmly centered in Michigan. This is far too big a training
job for any proprietary training school to manage by itself, so the
plan is to build Auto U as a collection of state schools, led by the
University of Michigan and all tied together through the Web.
Auto U looks innovative from several perspectives. First, many
courses will be designed by teams drawn from Auto U and business

MICHIGAN FOCUSES ON THE AUTO JOBS OF THE FUTURE
DETROIT, Feb 28.—The Governor or Michigan today called for a
large-scale education program that would use computer networks
and tax credits to help train workers for future job openings in the
automobile industry. . . .
The Governor said that to boost skills the state would create a
virtual university called Auto U, consisting of courses taught on the
Internet. Students could use computers to take classes focusing
on the auto industry.
In addition, [Governor] Engler said the state would act as a sort of
employment agency for the auto industry. The Michigan
Employment Security Commission will use applications – in person
and over the Internet—to screen job seekers.
SOURCE: The Wall Street Journal, February 28, 1996.

Figure 5.3—Auto U

Competing with New External Providers of Education

85

partners, giving business a much stronger voice in curriculum planning than it usually enjoys. Second, the Internet apparently will play
multiple roles here, beyond connecting students with instruction
and linking businesses into course design. Using Web sites connected to Auto U, the state’s employment commission will provide
instant access to all Michigan online automotive information for students and prospective employees. Students will even be able to take
virtual occupation tours, learning directly from workers about the
types of jobs available in plants today and the skills needed to do
them. (See also Figure 4.3.)
In short, Auto U appears to have the key trait of healthy electroniclearning communities, beginning with one or two core functions,
then quickly adding new functions and new stakeholder groups. The
third innovative feature of Auto U is the addition of one such group:
As well as public higher-education institutions, the Auto U partnership will also include some for-profit trainers. As such, it may be one
of the first examples of a cooperative arrangement that includes
higher education, external training providers, and business.
Since Auto U is still barely off the drawing board, it is too early to tell
how this cooperative partnership between higher education and external providers will work. Several relationships are possible. Perhaps reminiscent of Athena, principal partners (the University of
Michigan) might retain considerable control, contracting out specific
courses or services to specialized providers; more like MOLI, the
higher-education partners could manage, set goals, and ensure
courseware quality while delegating much courseware development
to external partners; even less constrained relationships, as exemplified by GNA, might work.
However, one common feature in all these possibilities is the role
that the Internet and Web will play in tying together the different
partners in this evolving community. As we have seen, networks
permit courseware and design discussions (as well as instruction delivery) to be shared readily, both within institutions and across their
boundaries, enabling a collection of very different (and physically
remote) institutions jointly to construct new educational curricula.
Absent rich network connections, such heterogeneous models of

86

Untangling the Web

education and training delivery simply were not feasible in the past.
But, if Michigan can make this experiment work, these models may
become increasingly popular in the future.

Chapter Six

ADDRESSING PLANNING AND POLICY: HOW TO
MAKE THE BEST USE OF THE INTERNET
AND WWW IN HIGHER EDUCATION

Anyone who began reading this report with the expectation that
simple prescriptions would be given for increasing productivity in
higher education using information technology might be confused at
this point, if not disappointed. Far from sketching an easy fix, we
have reviewed a wide array of Internet and Web-based applications
for education and training. And the applications are not just numerous; they differ along many dimensions:
•

Distance-learning systems aim (at least primarily) to increase access to learning while reducing costs.

•

Cutting-edge applications, such as intelligent tutoring systems
and simulation-based trainers, increase the quality of learning
but will not help institutions deal with shrinking budgets (at least
in the short term).

•

Individual publishing may be the best way to provide a new generation of learning materials that are responsive to consumer
and business needs (although this approach is much newer and
less certain than traditional publishing).

•

Online communities might help in meeting many challenges in
higher education (yet most seem to operate outside current institutional structures rather than within them).

•

External providers of training and educational services are making some of the most innovative uses of the Internet (but it is
rarely clear how higher education should use these models and
whether to do so in new markets, such as contract training, or in
more-traditional venues).

87

88

Untangling the Web

In this chapter, we first look at what really works in information
technology as applied to education, an area that is complicated at
best. We then offer specific recommendations about how higher education should think about the Internet and WWW in its future
planning.

REALITY CHECK: WHAT REALLY WORKS NOW
AND WHAT WILL WORK IN THE FUTURE
We have reviewed many applications of information technology and
the Internet in higher education, and many look enticing. But before
beginning what might be an extensive and costly reorganization to
accommodate them in classrooms, universities would, naturally, like
some assurance that these new tools can really deliver what they appear to promise.
How solid is the evidence that the various Internet and Web technologies can really address important goals and problems in higher
education? Not very. Without question, some educational tools have
been evaluated very carefully. (See Figure 2.1 for examples.) Many
distance-learning programs in higher education, for example, have
demonstrated that the cost of delivering courses can be reduced substantially while keeping student outcomes approximately constant.
A few “augmented” distance-learning programs have also improved
student learning. For instance, at Stanford University, students
learning physics through Tutored Video Instruction (whereby students watch videotaped lectures, replaying them off-campus, using a
small-group, cooperative-learning format) outperformed students
who actually attended lectures. Similarly, at both high-school and
college levels, some of the best intelligent-tutoring systems have fulfilled their goal of increasing the quality of student learning. Algebra,
geometry, and computer-programming tutoring systems developed
at Carnegie-Mellon University, to take one of the most well-known
successes, can raise scores on exams up to one full letter grade. On a
broader scale, meta-analyses—which aggregate results of many separate experimental studies—show a smaller, but still statistically
significant, effect of computer-based education.

Addressing Planning and Policy

89

What Works in Business
In many ways, the data for corporate training are both simpler and
more compelling than those for education. Most companies want to
train employees to become competent in relatively well-defined
skills (using word processors, spreadsheets, or more specialized tools
and software, for instance). Improvements in proficiency in these
skills can be easily measured. By the same token, it is easy to gauge
how much is saved by delivering this training through video rather
than using in-person instructors, as are the additional gains in flexibility and further cost reduction achieved by moving from conventional video to Web-based TV delivery systems. For many corporations, the results are impressive enough to justify investing billions of
dollars each year in technology-based training.
But these clear successes of information technology in education and
training are limited in many ways. First, as the examples from corporate training suggest, most of the solid evidence concerns a few very
well-defined skills. Standard tests can reliably measure how accurately a spreadsheet is used, how fast an algebra problem is solved,
and even how well a software routine is written. However, although
these are valuable talents, they only scratch the surface of the kinds
of abilities we want higher education, if not corporate training, to
foster. Complex skills—some specific to particular subjects, and others more generic, such as collaborative problem solving—are difficult
to measure; therefore, it is difficult to show that information technologies improve how they are learned. But then, for these skills, it is
currently impossible to demonstrate that any method of instruction
delivery, whether it exploits the Internet or not, leads to improved
learning. If this limitation disproportionately affects tools for learning and teaching that make heavy use of information technology,
such as the Internet or Web, it is because they are often strongly
associated with curriculum reforms that advocate teaching new,
probably valuable but certainly ill-defined, kinds of knowledge.
A more straightforward reason for the scarcity of data demonstrating
the value of Internet-based learning is that these applications are
very new. While earlier generations of distance learning have acquired a certain pedigree with time, distance-learning courses that
rely on high-bandwidth networks are now at most a few years old—
barely enough time to turn a raw course prototype into a production-

90

Untangling the Web

quality curriculum, let alone to collect a serious body of data showing how well students learn or how much schools might save.
These facts lead to a broader point. In general, the informationtechnology applications about which we know most are the ones that
have been around the longest. Conversely, the newest Internet and
Web applications have little evidence to prove, or disprove, their
value for higher education. Unfortunately, these applications are the
ones that, at least in theory and by logical argument, hold the most
promise for confronting key challenges for higher education. So,
anyone who insists on an airtight case before adopting a WWW technology will certainly be inclined to disregard, at least for now, some
of the most cutting-edge ideas and applications. Digital libraries that
amalgamate holdings across institutions, individual publishing ventures, cyberspace lecture halls, electronic communities of practice,
and virtual universities—none of these can claim yet to be sure bets
for higher education.
The question is how best to deal with this uncertainty. Plainly, an
ultraconservative approach, one that accepts only proven technologies in higher education, is likely to be as irresponsible as a radical
approach that embraces everything that looks appealing. In the latter case, costly errors may be committed; in the former case, valuable
opportunities may be missed. In deliberating this choice, it may be
instructive to reflect on lessons that businesses have learned, often
painfully, in integrating information technologies into the workplace
over the past 15 years.
To simplify only slightly, businesses generally have taken a very radical approach, early on adopting information technologies with relatively little forethought about which ones would best meet their
needs or how they might change work practices. As a result, it has
taken many years—and many billions of dollars—to demonstrate
that significant productivity gains were attributable to information technology. But, finally, these gains have materialized, partly
through a careful evaluation of technology options, partly because
the structure of the workplace has transformed to make the best use
of these new tools, and partly because productivity itself has been
redefined.

Addressing Planning and Policy

91

What Higher Education Can Learn from Business
Higher education, now poised to take a similar plunge into information technology, can learn several lessons from these experiences.
The first is that, eventually, the Internet and Web will probably live
up to some of the promises offered by the examples we have reviewed. Second, it is likely that this success will materialize—slowly;
that many applications that now appear to be most promising will
not realize those promises; and, conversely, that some that will
eventually succeed spectacularly are not even on the horizon today.
Third, as we have suggested several times, many successful applications will require modest or substantial organizational change on the
part of higher-education institutions.
One lesson we must not draw from business experiences, however, is
that higher education should be willing to spend billions of dollars
just to begin to see returns on investments in information technology. The resources required for such a radical strategy simply do not
exist, even if traditional educational institutions had the stomach for
such wild experimentation (a questionable assumption, to be sure).
Nor, we argue, is this necessary. Having let business bear the brunt
of being the earliest adopters, higher education can, we believe, take
a less radical and less costly approach and still reap the gains. But a
substantial commitment is still required (not an ultraconservative
strategy), and careful planning is needed to avoid as many pitfalls as
can reasonably be foreseen. The remainder of this report considers
some of the pieces of such a strategy.

POLICY ISSUES BYPASSED AND THOSE DISCUSSED
Our discussion has raised, but has not resolved, dozens of important
research questions and policy issues. Here we focus on just a few,
selecting those that have received relatively little discussion in higher
education and sidestepping a few that recently have benefited from
in-depth analysis. For example, several studies outline new methods
of learning and teaching afforded by information technology (moreauthentic and project-based curricula, among others) and the
changes in class organization, as well as teacher education, needed
to realize these practices.

92

Untangling the Web

Instead of repeating these discussions in higher education (most educational technology research and policy work is at the K–12 level),
we focus on several broader issues:
•

Rather than sketch how a particular higher-education institution
can increase its Internet capacity, we present an overview of the
issues that confront higher education as a whole in acquiring the
hardware and capacity needed to realize Web-based learning on
a broad scale.

•

Rather than advocate specific ideas for teacher education, we
consider how universities (and schools of education) might
broadly be reorganized, exploiting Internet technology to facilitate faculty learning and to encourage the creation of high-quality products for learning.

•

And, rather than discuss the costs, benefits, and processes involved in realizing particular technologies (say, a virtual university), we outline the types of questions that need to be answered
to select from among different technology models.

HOW WILL HIGHER EDUCATION ACQUIRE SUFFICIENT
INTERNET INFRASTRUCTURE?
On the surface, possibly the greatest barrier to moving higher education onto the Internet and Web in a big way is technical feasibility.
Many higher-education institutions are now developing and implementing plans for distance learning around technologies having
much less functionality than the Web will shortly offer—for example,
videotape sent through the mail, one-way TV (over cable channels)
augmented with two-way audio (through telephones), or two-way
video-conferencing using special-purpose hardware. To some of
them, a proposal to use the Internet and Web for fully interactive,
high-bandwidth, and multimedia courseware must look very premature. Perhaps, some will say, this is the Cadillac (if not the Mercedes)
we all might be able to enjoy ten years from now, but we need to get
started today—even if it means beginning with an Escort (if not a
Yugo).
Is the idea of using the Internet and Web on a broad scale in higher
education today very unrealistic? Is this functionality beyond the

Addressing Planning and Policy

93

admittedly modest, if not shrinking, pocketbooks of universities and
colleges? It is true that many higher-education institutions have little
Web presence at this time. California’s community colleges, for example, represent over 100 schools and serve more than 1.5 million
students per year, but as of April 1997, some of the schools were not
connected to the Internet at all.1 Of those that are wired, nearly onehalf provide just brief electronic brochures advertising the campus
and its mission. This is certainly a long way from the ample Internet
capacity education institutions will need to support richly interactive
course materials and electronic learning communities.
However, in one sense, this example is looking at the glass as half
empty. Higher-education institutions, in general, are very well represented on the Internet, which is hardly surprising: For its first 25
years, the Internet was inhabited mainly by universities, nonprofits,
and government agencies. True, colleges and smaller universities
still lag behind, but the larger schools remain among the most
extensive and most sophisticated users of Internet and Web
resources—even today, as commercial sites rapidly take over cyberspace. Web sites such as GNA and Athena already show that higher
education can manage mid-sized, if not yet large-scale, Internet
enterprises. Put most positively, the Internet is probably the only
form of information technology with which higher education has
more than kept pace with the business world, both in its raw capacity
and its skill in creating useful products. (On a given day, the average
university classroom surely logs more Web-site hits than phone
calls.) In one sense, then, to realize the many uses of the Web we
have reviewed, higher education needs to preserve its position on the
Internet more than it needs to gain new ground.
However, commercialization of the Internet and Web is sometimes
viewed as jeopardizing that position and as a threat to the small academic community that used to be cyberspace. Much of this concern
is well-founded; today, most of the early, free-wheeling, and unregulated “electronic frontier” is long gone. One of the specific complaints against commercial expansion of the Internet, however, is
that it will steal capacity, soon filling the pipes with cybercasts of
______________
1 See Web site http://www.cccco.edu/cccco/list/ccc-list.htm/ for a list of California

Community College online locations.

94

Untangling the Web

Instant Baseball,2 for instance, and potentially crowding out quality
educational material. Maybe so, in the short run, but over the long
term, commercialization actually may benefit higher education in
several ways.
To begin with, capacity shortfalls triggered by huge increases in demand for Internet services are being met quickly, as providers rapidly
lay down new fiber-optic cable and devise clever ways of using old
physical infrastructure (copper telephone wire, cable TV, and the
broadcast spectrum) to meet new needs. All of this upgrading is being driven by the commercial sector, of course, but education can
benefit too. Not only will this capacity expansion mean that educational material need not be crowded out; it actually suggests that education should have even more room in which to work than in the
past, and better tools to make use of that capability.
One of the reasons skeptics view the Internet as an inadequate
infrastructure for distance learning is that, even in its precommercial glory days, it did not supply the bandwidth needed to
deliver rich instructional material, such as two-way video, in realtime. Today, for example, viewing short (and noninteractive) video
clips using a 28.8K modem and a Web browser is a painfully slow
experience—enough to make educators take refuge, again, in
instructional TV. Commercialization of the Web will change this. A
collection of new software and hardware products—from cable
modems that provide hundreds of times the capacity of old phone
lines, to digital wireless connections, to fractal compression
algorithms that shrink movies so that they fit comfortably on old
phone lines—will permit the Internet to carry interactive multimedia
courseware, including video, from education servers to most homes
(those that have cable TV or home computers, at least) and
businesses.
At the same time that commercial interests have expanded the capacity of the Internet, new tools, along with economies of scale, are
______________
2 Instant Baseball is an Internet site that uses a Java-animated ballfield to present,

in virtual real-time, nearly every play in a major league baseball game. Instant
Ballpark provides animation, lineups, the status of all current games, and personalized replay of any part of any game played during the current season. See
http://www.instantsports.com/.

Addressing Planning and Policy

95

causing prices to drop dramatically. For example, video conferencing (in business as well as in educational settings) used to require
special-purpose and costly hardware. Now it can be done equally
well on the Internet, using ordinary PCs equipped with cameras
(some machines come with cameras already built in) and running
software tools such as CU-SeeMe. Although costs and features vary
somewhat from site to site, Internet video conferencing probably
costs, on average, about one-tenth the cost of special-purpose systems. (CU-SeeMe itself is free.) And this savings does not factor in
the greater flexibility of Internet video conferencing: special-purpose
video conferencing systems deliver instruction in only one way; networked PCs can be configured for video conferencing or for many of
the other instructional models we have reviewed here.

Issues and Policies for Acquiring Internet Infrastructure
In short, then, far from threatening higher education’s position,
commercialization of the Web is providing the tools and capacity
needed to create and deliver interactive, multimedia courseware at
very low prices. But knowing this is still a long way from saying how
specific institutions should go about building their Web products,
how they can be guaranteed the broadest and least-expensive
Internet access, or how much it might cost to wire universities and
colleges. Several recent studies have offered cost estimates for wiring
primary and secondary schools on the information superhighway,
describing the characteristics and prices of various connectivity
models. We are not aware of comparable analyses at the post-secondary level, and it is beyond the scope of this report to offer one. 3
However, we discuss a few broad issues and specific strategies that
can help higher education keep Internet costs to a minimum while
increasing access and functionality.
Coordinated technology plans and purchases. The simplest such
strategy that higher-education institutions—actually, all educational
______________
3 The cost of providing Internet and Web capability to all public higher-education

institutions across the country is yet another topic worthy of an in-depth analysis.
Several models, differing primarily in richness of connectivity and end-user hardware,
would need to be considered. To estimate costs accurately, the current levels of
Internet penetration would have to be taken into account, as would the price of
generating courseware and educating faculty.

96

Untangling the Web

institutions—should have is to change their model for technology
acquisition. Today schools at all levels buy (piecemeal) hardware, infrastructure, software, and support services for computers and networking, usually through funding mechanisms that provide only
small, yearly technology allocations and that rely heavily on intermittent donations from large foundations or corporations. Sometimes
these windfalls enable institutions to build impressive technologyintensive centers through substantial one-time investments. But to
put together broad technology infrastructures, higher education
would do much better to plan technology purchases more systematically, as corporations do, and especially to coordinate acquisitions
across a whole campus, institution, or even a system of schools.
Currently, telecommunication providers generally regard education
as a collection of small, sporadic buyers of computing goods and
services, rather than as large consumers whose purchases are driven
by a well-designed technology plan. As always, big, organized buyers
will get much more for their dollar than small, inconsistent ones.
This is a pity, because education is actually a huge industry, but one
that is handicapped because of its fragmentation. By coordinating
purchases around a coherent vision, higher-education institutions
would obtain much better prices; perhaps more important, they
could command the kinds of personalized services that only major
industries such as aerospace and entertainment now enjoy.
Exploiting a window of opportunity provided by the Telecommunications Act of 1996. As important as it is for higher education to develop long-term technology plans and form large-scale purchasing
alliances in order to negotiate effectively for Internet infrastructure,
taking less-direct policy actions may be even more crucial. State and
federal debates are now setting the stage for regulations that will influence the quantity, quality, distribution, and cost of telecommunication infrastructure and services over the coming decades. New
laws forged during these deliberations will certainly change the character of the Internet in many ways, potentially affecting educational
applications just as profoundly as they do commercial applications.
The centerpiece of this legislation is the Telecommunications Act of
1996. With the act’s passage, many think the best window of opportunity for influencing policy so that it will benefit education is now
gone. Not so. In fact, the act ignores several critical issues, delegates

Addressing Planning and Policy

97

some decisions, and defers yet others to later dates. A brief sampling
of some of these still-open opportunities (Figure 6.1) shows that
Internet capabilities available to higher education, and their costs,

Issue

Implications for Education

Universal Service . The act
provides only broad guidelines
for universal service. The real
fights will take place at the state
level, between the FCC and
Public Utilities Commissions.

Local battles will decide what
universal service means now,
and how it evolves over time.
Eventually, it could include
Internet and broadband access
for all. Now, it just covers
phone service.

Consumer Protection. Federal
and state regulatory agencies
still must set rules governing
competition in local phone (and
often cable) markets. Longdistance companies are already
fighting for a “modem tax.”

These local battles will have
direct effects on consumersʼ
choices and rates. They may
also affect Internet costs,
which are currently low and
independent of distance.
Long-distance phone companies are challenging this situation.

Intellectual Property . Decisions
concerning intellectual-property
rights were not addressed in the
act. Congress is currently
holding separate hearings on
them.

At stake is whether current
principles of fair use and public
domain will apply to electronic
communications. The current
administrationʼs White Paper
would make even browsing
copyrighted documents an infringement.

Spectrum Auctions. Spectrum
decisions were initially part of
the act, but were stricken at the
last minute. At issue is whether
networks will be granted spectrum for free, or whether it will
be auctioned by the FCC (garnering tens of billions of dollars).

If the spectrum is auctioned,
proceeds could be reinvested,
for example, to wire schools
and fund educational services.
Alternatively, if the spectrum is
not auctioned, TV networks
could be required to dedicate
fixed amounts of bandwidth to
education and training.

Figure 6.1—What the Telecommunications Act of 1996 Doesn’t Tell You

98

Untangling the Web

could look very different, depending on the outcome of political
fights still to come in Washington and state legislatures. In the best
of all worlds, consumers would pay modest amounts to access
courseware across the Web, regardless of distance, providers would
have multiple paths along which to distribute their courseware, and
both would be relatively free to use copyrighted material for learning
purposes. In the worst of all worlds, consumers would pay substantial sums to access courseware at a distance, providers would enjoy
few options for distributing materials, and the content produced and
consumed would be severely limited by extremely tight intellectualproperty laws.
Whether the world turns out closer to the best of all, or more like the
worst of all, will depend, in part, on how effectively advocates argue
higher education’s case over the next year or two. Based on history,
prospects look bleak indeed. While publishers, cable, and telephone
companies have powerful lobbies in Washington, education’s cause
in the telecommunications-reform debates is being championed by
only a few educational organizations and a handful in Congress.
When it comes to political advocacy, higher education is about as
fragmented as it is in technology acquisition, and with similar results—or lack of results. However, if higher education could patch
together its uncoordinated constituencies, it could achieve the size,
and eventually the clout, of a powerful lobbying organization such as
the American Association of Retired Persons. A group with even a
fraction of that weight might help steer many ongoing telecommunications debates in favor of education. But to do so would require
that different institutions unite behind a broad common vision of
what they want to do in education and what technology tools are
required to get the job done—to become, if necessary, a single-issue
group that sends a consistent message about the telecommunications infrastructure it will need in the next century.

How Will Individual Learners Access Internet-Based
Education?
Even if higher-education institutions can secure the infrastructure
needed to supply generous amounts of richly interactive courseware
across the Internet, only one-half of the problem is solved. The rest

Addressing Planning and Policy

99

will be accomplished when consumers—students of all ages—are
able to interact comfortably and cheaply with these products. Many
already can, of course. But, if education on the Internet is to be as
readily available as education in the classroom, students of all ages
will need almost universal access to online courseware. Today, this
is not the case.
Assuming that cable TV, upgraded phone lines, or new wireless paths
can bring the Internet to the door (admittedly a somewhat open
question), students still need machines on which to display, process,
and even create digital courseware. Right now, the only machine
that does this is a personal (or bigger) computer, which, adequately
equipped for Net surfing, costs little more than $1,000—about onehalf what a comparable machine cost just three years ago. Roughly
one-third of U.S. households have at least one PC; however, while
this number is steadily growing, the fraction is not changing very
rapidly, in part because PCs remain several times more expensive
than other information appliances, such as TVs. This means that the
next decade, at least, will see a gap of 50 percent or more between the
goal of universal access and the percentage of homes that are likely
to have PCs.4 Can this gap be completely closed, and at what cost?
Technology changes, ushered in by commercialization of the
Internet, certainly will shrink the gap somewhat. PC prices will continue to drop, which, combined with increases in computer demand
(in part to access Internet and Web products), will draw some consumers on board. But, the advent of dedicated Internet appliances
(at perhaps $500 per unit), or possibly Web televisions (which, for
much less than $1,000 allow passive TV watching as well as moreactive Web browsing), is likely to more immediately increase Internet
access. How much and how quickly it shrinks the universal-access
gap is anyone’s guess. One generous conjecture might be that,
within a decade, 75 percent of households will have some kind of
______________
4 The percentage of households that have access to a PC, of course, will be higher than

the percentage that own one; some might use computers at the office, or perhaps at
public sites such as libraries. Using computer-access figures rather than numbers for
computer ownership, therefore, will reduce somewhat the gaps we calculate, but not
enough to change our argument significantly. Moreover, one might argue that a level
of Internet access adequate for education would necessitate PC availability “anytime,
anywhere,” which, generally, is best achieved at home.

100 Untangling the Web

Internet machine—about midway between the percentages of
households with cable TV (65 percent) and with VCRs (85 percent).
Given a serious commitment to universal access, policy instruments,
rather than technological devices, probably will be needed to cut further into the remaining 25 percent gap. The policies that are appropriate will depend on who makes up this remainder. Many ideas
have been considered: Universities could supply machines for students (some already do); older computers might be recycled to lowincome students; libraries and other community services could provide Internet access; manufacturers might consider pay terminals
(analogous to pay telephones); and governments could use vouchers
as well as other forms of cross-subsidy.
It is beyond the scope of this report to articulate policies in detail, or
to outline whom they should target. (See Anderson, Bikson, et al.,
1995, for relevant analyses.) Suffice it to say that students most in
need of help will have relatively low incomes and low education levels. In short, many of those who would profit most by Internet appliances will be least able to afford them.

HOW WILL HIGHER EDUCATION ACQUIRE QUALITY
COURSEWARE AND EDUCATE FACULTY?
If universities and students soon enjoy lavish Internet capacity, they
still will need quality Web learning products that make good use of
this capacity. To judge by current offerings, obtaining such products
will take a long time. As any Net surfer knows, most Web sites offer
little of value, and what useful educational products do exist are difficult to find, because they are usually “hidden” in isolated pages
rather than combined into well-organized structures akin to textbook
chapters or libraries. Moreover, the first generation of tools for creating Web documents was far from user-friendly: Faculty who built
homepages needed to be skilled word processors, understand the
rudiments of HTML (the current de facto standard for Web products), have access to tools that translate files among several different
text and video formats, and even program in Java, in order to develop
highly interactive educational products.
In spite of these challenges, there are several reasons for optimism.
First, as we have seen, Web-based courseware is already beginning to

Addressing Planning and Policy 101

flourish, and sites such as the World Lecture Hall, GNA, and MOLI
are adding several layers of organization to these individual products. In doing so, they are both facilitating access by students and
making it easier for faculty to find and build new online courses. A
related bonus is that courseware is becoming easier to construct, in
part because much Web publishing is based on a nontraditional
model for creating content: Instead of being created from scratch,
new courses are often built from previous ones, using simple digital
cut and paste—just one example of how the Web encourages rapid
development by facilitating layering of products, one on another.
Layering means that individual faculty will be able to build much
courseware using just simple editing tools; not all will need to master
the programming skills usually required to create courseware from
scratch.
Driven by a rapidly evolving commercial market, software vendors
are now coming up with a new generation of tools that will automate
much of the construction of Web courseware, so that it is becoming
easier to create courseware from scratch when necessary. In the
past, constructing even the simplest Web homepage required at least
a bit of HTML coding. Now faculty can use off-the-shelf tools to
create many multimedia products with almost no direct programming. Some tools convert existing documents into Web-ready format (e.g., Sunrise Packaging’s rtftohtml); others build new homepages through dialogues with users (e.g., Microsoft’s FrontPage); still
others provide high-level graphical interfaces, delegating the synthesis of low-level HTML code to underlying software (e.g.,
SoftQuad’s HoTMetaL PRO). Predictably, a few Web publishing wizards have put together sites that organize many of these diverse
authoring resources, providing a valuable starting point for those
interested in learning about them.
Finally, and perhaps most important, online information sources
and support communities abound. They will help even the leastWeb-savvy faculty member develop the necessary Web and Internet
skills. These sources take several forms, ranging from simple FAQs
(lists of frequently asked questions, plus answers), to detailed hypertext documents on the art of HTML programming, to newsgroups
and listservs that engage in active discussions on how to provide
Web services. All these are free. For a fee, any of hundreds of startup companies that now offer Web product-development support will

102 Untangling the Web

gladly design and implement Internet sites of any size, or will assist
institutions or individual faculty in doing so.5

Issues and Policies for Acquiring Quality Courseware
and Educating Faculty
Even if all these tools and supports help faculty become comfortable
creating and teaching Web-based distance-learning courses, highereducation institutions will probably need to consider several kinds of
changes and policies to smooth what might be a substantial transformation for many teachers. An obvious first step might be to offer
courses that give faculty hands-on training with Web publishing
technologies and, more broadly, that demonstrate examples of good
Web courseware and principles for creating useful educational products on the Internet. But who will provide such teacher training services? We suggest several possibilities below.
Who will teach the teachers? It is natural to expect that schools of
education would continue to play a pivotal role here. Certainly they
will need to revamp many programs to help faculty acquire new
teaching skills that are better suited to technology-intensive classrooms—classrooms that will be less dominated by lecture and more
driven by collaborative projects or online mentoring. But to delegate
all training on Web publishing, as well as on new teaching practices,
to schools of education might risk duplicating services unnecessarily
since, as we just noted, online communities are already poised to do
much of the job and offer yet another example of new electronic
communities that crisscross the boundaries of traditional highereducation institutions. Higher education must find strategies for
coordinating with such communities, if only because much of the
literature and training they offer is good—and free.
Although courses and electronic communities might help faculty acquire skills in Web-based courseware development, one big question
______________
5 We do not discuss these providers in detail, in part because we assume higher

education, unlike many other businesses, cannot afford to outsource such services.
However, partnerships might be feasible if (as with Internet infrastructure)
universities would coordinate their fragmented constituents, in effect becoming a
large consumer that could command first-rate Web development services for cut-rate
prices.

Addressing Planning and Policy 103

remains: Where will the time to acquire the skills and the money to
pay for everything come from? We suggest that skills can be acquired
at roughly current levels of funding, provided faculty can reallocate
the time they devote to their various teaching activities. As we have
noted, information technology is slowly beginning to displace some
of the traditional teaching roles of faculty; students will spend more
time working with smart software or watching digital lectures and
less time listening to live discourses. This shift might tempt some
schools to cut staff and thus reduce costs, but an alternative would
be for faculty to be retained and to use their newly freed-up time to
play other roles.
One role that may expand is intensive coaching, to help students
learn when even rich interactive software is not enough. Or, faculty
could spend more time creating courseware. Thus, one way to acquire better-quality online courseware, and to educate faculty to create and use it effectively, is simply to recommend that faculty be
given more time and resources to engage in these activities. If the
transition from lecture-intensive curricula to Web-based courseware
is managed reasonably, this added course-development time may
come at little or no increased cost to higher-education institutions.
In effect, the outlay should come out of savings in direct teaching
costs. (Over the long term, of course, it may also be more productive
to hire new faculty whose strongest teaching skills are in courseware
development rather than in lecture delivery. But that is a different
policy decision.)
Nourishing grassroots publication. Higher-education institutions
can also encourage the development of higher-quality Web
courseware through tactics that help foster and manage the
grassroots, or individual, publishing that is taking shape in online
communities such as the World Lecture Hall. Universities and
colleges could follow GNA’s lead and provide a common
infrastructure for online courses. The fact that many contributions
in these databases already come from higher-education institutions
suggests that, even today, universities have much courseware to be
organized. Perhaps they would do even better to copy proprietary
institutions, e.g., MOLI, which supply such value-added services as
establishing areas and goals for new courseware, offering technical
assistance to courseware developers, and furnishing quality-control
standards.

104 Untangling the Web

Setting standards for courseware format will probably be as important in the long run as setting content standards. If faculty develop
materials in diverse formats that do not interoperate, the advantages
of creating new courseware using simple cut-and-paste tools diminish greatly. Lecture overheads rendered in PowerPoint, for example,
do not mix easily with Adobe Photoshop representations. On the
other hand, if universities encourage faculty to build online courses
that adhere to emerging Web-document standards, they will be
inviting the sharing of course products. One of the great strengths of
the early Internet, veterans will say, is that intellectual products—
software and ideas alike—were shared freely. The past was never
really quite so grand, but it is true that the tradition of “freeware,”
“shareware,” and “open systems” has been strong on the Internet,
and it will probably continue to be essential, in some form, if individual publishing in higher education is to prosper.
This culture of sharing faces several threats, and higher education
should keep them in mind, if not actively work to keep them in
check. One, discussed in Chapter Three of this report, concerns
copyright and, more generally, intellectual-property rights. Legislation now being drafted in Washington may cripple almost any
sharing of materials copyrighted to publishing firms. However, individual faculty publishers (or their institutions) also should have
protection for their intellectual products. Many professors (and
some universities) already make substantial sums selling courseware
(usually as books, but increasingly in educational software). As with
big publishers, they too may be reluctant to share their materials
without being compensated. As always, the challenge is to strike a
balance that rewards innovation enough to keep new ideas (here,
courseware) flowing while also maximizing the social benefits of
those new ideas (here, the sharing and use of courseware).
Individual faculty, their institutions, and higher education as a sector
have yet to work out clear policies that define a feasible balance
point. These decisions are tough enough when restricted to a single
college or university but take on added complexity when courseware
is shared across institutions or even states, not just within them.
Virtual universities, such as the World Lecture Hall and MOLI, will
catalog courseware from any publisher that meets their standards
(standards are nonexistent in the World Lecture Hall), regardless of
location. In so doing, they recognize that one of the most powerful

Addressing Planning and Policy 105

features of the Internet is that it encourages the free flow of ideas and
course materials to any place in the country (and around the
world)—an idea that most states and public universities have yet to
come to terms with.
Such free flow is perhaps the biggest issue higher-education institutions will have to face in the near future. State and academy barriers
are much tougher to defend against “invading” software than national barriers are to defend against, say, illegal aliens. Laws will
need to be rewritten to reflect the fact that courseware that might be
in college online catalogs will probably be derived from, or even
wholesale copies made from, products found in other university
databases. Nor should such sharing be viewed as simply bowing
to the inexorable forces of network technologies that make editing
and transmitting digital materials virtually effortless. If managed
properly—for example, through careful quality controls and wellorganized cataloguing services—the net effect of promoting such
sharing can be a dramatic gain in the quality of Web-based
courseware.
One cost of this freedom, of course, will be that the boundaries between different institutions may begin to blur, at least when it comes
to course offerings, if not social functions and research reputations.
(However, in some disciplines, inter-institution research collaboration is also increasing.) Such blurring suggests that, in the future,
some universities might be more brokers of education, reminiscent
of MOLI and GNA, than full-service providers.
Should all universities have course development as a central part of
their educational mission? Answering this question goes well beyond
understanding how higher-education institutions can help foster
high-quality courseware on the Web; it touches on the deeper issues
of new models of educational delivery that information technologies
enable. In the next section, we briefly offer some answers.

HOW WILL HIGHER EDUCATION MAKE CHOICES ABOUT
NEW DELIVERY MODELS FOR EDUCATION?
The preceding two sections address broad issues of feasibility and
capacity, but not how such capabilities will be put to work.
Assuming higher education has the financial, physical, and human

106 Untangling the Web

resources necessary to use the Web and Internet, what structures or
models should it adopt for delivering educational services?

No More One-Stop Shopping?
The dominant model of delivery in higher education is still one-stop
shopping: A single provider offers all educational services (including
course creation, course delivery, counseling, student evaluation and
accreditation, deciding which course collections will lead to degrees,
and, often, support for job placement) at a single location. (Consumers are expected to come to the provider, not the converse.) But
this model may be challenged for dominance. New information
technologies add substantially to the set of models that providers can
consider. Many of the case studies we have reviewed demonstrate
that some of these different delivery structures already have moved
from the drawing board into practice. Broadly, these models unbundle educational services and repackage them in different ways.
Some highly specialized providers offer only a few courses rather
than large sequenced collections, some broker courses rather than
creating them, and others create and deliver courses, but in partnership with several providers rather than solo.
While mass education, including primary and secondary schools, vocational and training institutions, and colleges and universities may
be the most common formal method of learning, many of us remember taking piano or dance lessons from highly specialized
providers. Although marginal in this country, intensive apprenticeships have persisted as powerful learning methods for centuries—so
much so that many hope that information technologies soon will
make cognitive apprenticeships feasible on a large scale. (See Figure
2.9.) And new information technologies are not the only reason different models of education delivery are beginning to flourish.
Growing markets for adult-learning services require changes in traditional delivery models; consumers of on-the-job training, for example, insist on courses that are highly tailored to specific needs,
rapidly changeable, and delivered at the workplace, not in the classroom.
New information technologies are supplying most of the raw materials from which delivery models that meet these demands can be
fashioned. In the past, regardless of demand, it was prohibitively ex-

Addressing Planning and Policy 107

pensive to consider, say, creating courses for a widely scattered and
relatively small group of consumers. Now distance matters little in
the economics of such services. And whereas, once, only the largest
corporate-training clients could expect house calls from education
providers, today size counts for much less, because on-site education
can be done mainly through high-bandwidth network virtual visits.
Time is also less of a factor: House calls from education providers
never came on demand; now educational courseware can be accessed across the Web 24 hours a day.

Processes and Products That Specialize
The idea that information technologies can (and should) radically
transform processes and products seems routine in discussions of
manufacturing and service industries, but the idea that the Internet
might help reduce costs of courses or improve the quality of students’ learning still draws doubts from thoughtful pundits such as
Larry Cuban (1986), Neil Postman (1995), and Clifford Stoll (1995).
But no one questions that the same tools help produce lower-priced,
higher-quality cars. The view that technologies could help speed the
creation of courses or help build courses tailored to specific learners
seems original and offbeat, yet just-in-time manufacturing is familiar
to anyone with even a passing knowledge of business. And while the
idea that a monolithic education institution might be unbundled
into a collection of services may sound altogether foreign, it is the industry conglomerate that sometimes looks out-of-touch with modern views that businesses often do much better by specializing, and
perhaps partnering with others to develop products.

Questions in the Range of Alternative Education-Delivery
Models
One way to encourage discussion of the different models of education delivery enabled by new information technologies such as the
Internet and Web might be to try to systematically attempt to characterize the vast range, or space, of alternatives. However, doing so
would probably be as cumbersome as trying to describe all the ways
that businesses could restructure using new technologies. Instead,
we limit ourselves to posing a series of questions—most stemming
from the different applications of the Web and Internet we have re-

108 Untangling the Web

viewed—that summarize a wide range of ways the structure of educational services is changing to make effective use of new information technologies. We deliberately pose the questions as challenges
to facets of the familiar one-stop-shopping model, not necessarily
because that model is flawed, but because points in the “space” of alternatives nearby familiar models are likely to be explored, while
more distant ones may go unnoticed. The list is by no means complete. We intend it as a spur to discussions of these unusual, and
sometimes useful, alternatives.
Knowledge chunks: Why are courses so long? Courses in higher education usually extend across many weeks. Quarters and semesters
vary in size across institutions, but not radically. And within institutions, there is little variation at all. Courses offered to corporations
by external providers, on the other hand, often last no longer than a
few hours and are driven by the needs of the client and requirements
of the material, rather than by the conventions of the providers. One-size-fits-all courses certainly make bookkeeping easier
for degree-granting institutions and probably are impossible to
circumvent if classes must meet at scheduled times and places. But
if students learn mainly at a distance, can choose to start a course
when they wish, and can access courseware anyplace, anytime,
perhaps courses of variable length, tailored to the needs of the
subject (and, of course, to the needs and learning style of the
student) are feasible.
Course flexibility: Why offer only a few courses per subject? Why not
add to course listings in an ongoing fashion? Most universities and
colleges change their course offerings slowly compared with MOLI
and GNA. On the surface, increasing speed of course creation and
the diversity of courseware could only help consumers, assuming
value-added counseling services were available to help them select
the products that best match their current level of expertise, educational goals, and learning styles. Tools that permit faculty to rapidly
create new Web products certainly will help expand the range of
courseware a university offers. However, MOLI and GNA enjoy even
more flexibility, because they invite outside developers to develop
online materials. Whether or not institutions can offer a large pool of
courses, therefore, will probably depend on changes to other structural features, some of which are noted below.

Addressing Planning and Policy 109

Why limit class enrollment? Most university courses place caps on
the number of students they will admit, and on the size of individual
classes. In prestigious institutions, this often means that demand
outstrips supply in ways that more market-driven service industries
never see. Recent experiments at the City University of New York
and long-term successes at the Open University indicate that distance-learning technologies can open up enrollment while keeping
costs under control and quality reasonably high. As demand for
quality adult education continues to grow, various models of
“partially open” enrollment might be worth considering. A school
might, for example, allow anyone to take a distance-learning course
on the Web for a nominal fee, subject to the constraint that he or she
access only online resources (such as lecture materials and electronic
quizzes seen in courses on the World Lecture Hall). Students could
also pay additional fees for more labor-intensive services, such as
online tutoring and proctored exams.
Why should faculty spend more time directly delivering information
rather than engaging in other functions, especially courseware
development? If open or partially open enrollments become more
common, the direct involvement of faculty in delivering education
(e.g., through live lecture) probably will diminish, since more and
more students will access recorded and interactive materials online,
rather than attending classes. At the same time, other teaching
functions, in particular the creation of courseware that is accessed at
a distance, will become increasingly important. Models that
emphasize content development over delivery will probably also
change hiring practices; new faculty may need to be as skilled at
multimedia publication as they are at playing “sage on the stage.”
Why should universities develop courseware? Why not concentrate
more on value-added management and brokering services? Perhaps some universities could do away with courseware development
as well as with direct course delivery. The World Lecture Hall and the
Global Network Academy suggest models of educational services in
which the functions traditionally bundled together as one-stop
shopping are now separated. Institutions that specialize in organizing courseware developed by others could offer several advantages to
consumers: warehousing of many courses on a single subject, giving
consumers a wide range of choices; offering only the best courseware, from superstar faculty, as does The Teaching Company

110 Untangling the Web

(Figure 2.10); or concentrating on other important value-added
services, as does the Western Governors University (http://wgainternet.westgov.org/smart/vu/vu.html). Western Governors University is not planning to develop or deliver courseware, but will
conduct needs assessments to determine areas in which course offerings are insufficient, provide quality-assurance and qualityassessment tools to measure student learning (and course efficacy),
and establish requirements for degrees and other credentials, as well
as supplying centralized services, including libraries and repositories
of student records. More broadly, in such models, higher-education
institutions would supply high-level management, resources, and
vision; many of the specific tasks would be done by specialized
providers.
Why not pool common information resources, such as libraries?
Some new-models universities might unbundle services and specialize in a few key functions. However, alternative models might bundle pieces that are typically separate. For example, pooling courseware across institutions would give consumers greater freedom of
choice. By the same token, it makes good sense to aggregate electronic libraries across institutions: Students lose nothing if a virtual
library is “moved” off-campus and will gain access to richer collections if their library is merged with other holdings. These are just two
examples of educational models that try to exploit some potential
benefits of the free flow of information across institution, state, or
even national boundaries.
Why not partner with for-profits as well as with other nonprofit and
public providers? If higher-education institutions explore delivery
models that unbundle services, they will also need to consider various alternatives for partnering with other providers—institutions
that provide those services that they themselves have decided to delegate, and with whom they will need to coordinate if they still wish to
offer full-service education. In particular, given that the for-profit
sector (mainly high-tech corporate training) is expanding much
more rapidly than is traditional higher education, various heterogeneous models that include a mix of public and private institutions
will need to be considered.
Today, this country spends about as much on for-profit educational
services as on public education; shortly, corporate training alone will

Addressing Planning and Policy 111

exceed higher education in size. Thus, if higher education remains
separate from these other participants in the adult-learning market,
its presence will continue to diminish.

REFERENCES

Anderson, J. R., A. T. Corbett, K. Koedinger, and R. Pelletier.
“Cognitive Tutors: Lessons Learned,” The Journal of the Learning
Sciences, Vol. 4, Issue 2, 1995, pp. 167–207.
Anderson, R. H., T. K. Bikson, S. A. Law, B. Mitchell, C. Kedzie, B.
Keltner, C. W. Panis, J. Pliskin, and P. Srinagesh. Universal Access
to E-Mail: Feasibility and Societal Implications, Santa Monica,
Calif.: RAND, MR-650-MF, 1995.
Cuban, L. Teachers and Machines, New York: Teachers College Press,
1986.
Dewar, J. The Information Age and the Printing Press: Looking
Backward to See Ahead, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND P-8014, 1998.
Dwyer, D. “Apple Classrooms of Tomorrow: What We’ve Learned,”
Educational Leadership, April 1994, pp. 4–10.
Fletcher, D. “The Effectiveness and Cost of Interactive Videodisc
Instruction,” Machine-Mediated Learning, 3, 1989, pp. 361–385.
Gomez, L. M., and D. N. Gordin. “Establishing Project-Enhanced
Classrooms Through Design,” in D. Jonassen and G. McCalla,
eds., Proceedings of the International Conference on Computers in
Education, Charlottesville, Va.: AACE, 1996.
Hall, B.. “Return on Investment and Multimedia Training,”
Multimedia Training and Internet Newsletter, July–August 1995.

113

114 Untangling the Web

Katz, S., A. Lesgold, G. Eggan, and M. Gordin. “Modeling the Student
in SHERLOCK II,” Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Education
(Special Issue on Student Modeling), Vol. 3, No. 4, 1993, pp. 495–
518.
Kulik, J. A. “Meta-analytic Studies of Findings on Computer-Based
Instruction,” in E. L. Baker and H. F. O’Neil, eds., Technology
Assessment in Education and Training,. Hillsdale, N.J.: LEA
Publishers, 1994.
McArthur, D., and M. Lewis. “Muddy Learning: Evaluating Learning
in Multi-User Computer-Based Environments,” unpublished,
1996.
McEldowney, P.
“Scholarly Electronic Journals—Trends
and Academic Attitudes: A Research Proposal” (URL
http://poe.acc.virginia.edu/~pm9k/libsci/ejs.html), 1995.
Perraton, H. “Comparative Cost of Distance Teaching in Higher
Education: Scale and Quality,” in G. Dhanarajan, P. K. Ip, K. S.
Yuen, and C Swales, eds., Economics of Distance Learning, Hong
Kong: Open Learning Press, 1994.
Postman, N. The End of Education: Redefining the Value of School,
New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1995.
Resnick, M. Turtles, Termites, and Traffic Jams: Explorations in
Massively Parallel Microworlds, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
1994.
Rosen, S. “The Economics of Superstars,” American Economic
Review, Vol. 71, No. 5, 1981, pp. 845–858.
Rothenberg, J. “Ensuring the Longevity of Digital Documents,”
Scientific American, January 1995, pp. 24–29.
Stoll, C. Silicon Snake Oil: Second Thoughts on the Information
Highway, New York: Doubleday Anchor Books, 1995.
Tyack, L., and L. Cuban. Tinkering Toward Utopia, Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1995.

